Mr. Let's pick up
Order.
Oaths and affirmations of allegiance.
The two honorable members who are taking
their oath or affirmation of allegiance
today will proceed to the table to do so
when their names are called.
Mr. Eric Chuah,
Miss Sylvia Lynn.
Members are to raise your right hands
and repeat after me. I
>> I
>> Please state your name. Erica,
>> having been elected as a member of the
Parliament of Singapore,
>> having been elected as a member of
Parliament Parliament of Singapore,
>> do solemnly swear or affirm
>> do solemnly affirm
>> that I will faithfully discharge my
duties as such.
>> that will I will faithfully discharge my
duties as such
>> to the best of my ability.
>> to the best to the best of my ability.
that I will bear true faith and
allegiance
>> that I will bear true faith and
>> to the Republic of Singapore
>> and that I will preserve
>> protect
>> protect protect
>> and defend
>> the Constitution of the Republic of
Singapore.
>> So help me God. Members may now sign
their oaths.
And we now resume your seats.
Order.
Election of deputy speakers.
Mr. Speaker, I propose that Mr.
Christopher Duza, Mr. Sen be elected as
deputy speakers of this parliament. I'm
confident that Christopher and Yaochen
will bring to their roles a strong sense
of duty and sound judgment. Both are
deeply committed to good governance and
impartiality to promote constructive
respectful debate across party lines in
this house. Thank you,
>> Mr. Speaker. I support the proposal.
Are there further proposals from
honorable members?
There being no further proposal, I now
declare that proposals for the election
of deputy speakers are closed.
And I congratulate both um
I congratulate both uh deputy the new
deputy speakers
Christie Christ Douza and Mr. Sed
as the two my two new deputy speakers
and I look forward to you supporting me
in this in the discharge of my duties.
Honorable members, I wish to inform the
house that our cler of parliament miss
will retire on 23rd September
2025. That is tomorrow and this is after
33 years of distinguished service.
Miss Un began her parliamentary career
in 1992
and she became our sixth and first woman
club of parliament in 205.
I first met her when I entered the house
in 206.
From my early days as a new MP through
my time as deputy sec speaker and now as
speaker, her patient guidance and her
deep knowledge of parliamentary
procedures have been invaluable.
Renowned for her mastery of the standing
orders. Miss has served as a principal
advisor to speakers and members with
impartiality and meticulous care.
She strengthened the work of various
committees,
steered the house through the challenges
of the pandemic, and led the secretariat
through three decades of techn
technological change, ensuring that
parliament kept pace with the times.
When in doubt about procedure,
we and I do not turn to Mr. Google.
We all turn to Miss Un
as head of the secretariat. Her
leadership has kept parliament running
seamlessly and enhanced Singapore's
profile through many international and
regional conferences and meetings.
Her legacy of excellence and innovation
will endure.
I'm also pleased to announce that Mr.
Xiaoing Han our current deputy cler
since 208 will succeed as clout of
parliament tomorrow on the 23rd of
September 2025.
I extend on behalf of all members our
heartiest congratulations to Mr. Sea on
his appointment.
Finally, on behalf of all members and
speakers, past and present, I convey our
deepest gratitude to Miss for her
exemplary service and to wish her every
happiness in the next chapter of her
life. Seljen, we will miss your wise
counsel and your unwavering dedication.
Thank you,
>> leader.
Mr. Speaker, please allow me on behalf
of members to pay tribute to our cler of
parliament, Miss Unia.
Miss joined the parliamentary service as
an assistant cler in 1992 and was
appointed cler of parliament in 2005.
As cler, she has seen us through more
than two decades and six terms of
parliament and worked with five speakers
and leaders of the house. Through it
all, she has been a constant and
reliable presence in this house whom
members have been able to turn to for
guidance on parliamentary procedure. By
nature, Miss is unassuming. But that
belies her great expertise, knowledge,
and capability. In the last 20 years,
she has played a crucial role in
ensuring that every parliament sitting
runs smoothly.
to the chamber and to the public. It
appears as though this is effortless,
but the reality is that it takes an
enormous amount of work behind the
scenes to ensure that every sitting runs
smoothly. And this is due in very large
part to the work of the clarks who have
been aly overseen and guided by Miss.
Thanks to her tireless dedication, our
parliamentary proceedings run like
clockwork, even when things hit a fever
pitch during the frenzy of the Committee
of Supply debates each year. This task
became even more challenging in recent
years with a higher number of PQs,
motions, and other parliamentary
business. Through it all, she has been
the invisible hand behind the smooth
proceedings that this house has enjoyed,
notwithstanding the increasing workload
and the massive amount of coordination
required. As cler of parliament, Miss
has also been our foremost in-house
expert on parliamentary procedure and
the standing orders. Her command of
parliamentary procedure is built on not
only her wealth of experience, but her
legal training prior to joining the
parliamentary service. And here on a
more personal note, I should mention
that Miss and I were classmates in law
school from the graduating cohort of
1986.
I don't think that at that time we both
envisaged that we would land up in the
same chamber, but it has been a pleasure
to work with her here and in law school
she was the same, friendly, diligent and
always a pleasure to work with. Miss has
over over has also overseen key
transformations of our parliament over
the last two decades. This include the
live streaming of parliamentary
proceedings and efforts to simplify
language used in parliament and increase
public outreach to demystify parliament
works. What these initiatives have in
common is Miss's commitment to making
parliamentary proceedings more
accessible to the public. She also
personally oversaw the implementation of
the improvements in the members room
including the improved menu. So you know
whom you have to thank for that. Miss
has carried the heavy responsibilities
of her office with a steady hand, a
faithful heart and an enduring devotion
to this house. On behalf of all members,
thank you Shiaan for your 33 years of
distinguished service. We wish you a
fulfilling and thoroughly well-deserved
retirement. On behalf of all members, I
also wish to extend our warmest
congratulations to Mr. Xiaoing Han on
his appointment as the new cler of
parliament with effect from tomorrow.
Mr. Mr. Seao is no stranger to us having
served as deputy cler since 2008 and I
have no doubt that we are in good hands
with Mr. Seao as cler for the 15th
parliament. Thank you.
>> Order questions four or answer Mr.
N
>> question one sir.
>> Minister Bibbin.
>> Mr. Speaker, I will be making a
ministerial statement later on the
situation in the Middle East. I seek
your approval to answer all 13
parliamentary questions which have been
filed on the same subject. This these
would be questions number 1 to six for
oral answer and questions number 26 to
32 for written answer.
I give my concern Mr. Anguong.
Mr. Speaker, may I have your permission
to answer questions 7 to 11 together? My
response will also address written PQs
15 to 18 in today's order paper and
similar questions raised by Mr. Zukan
Abdul Rahim, Miss Polyan, Mr. Shario
Taha, Dr. Hammed Razak, and Mr. David Ho
scheduled for later sittings. I will
invite members to seek clarifications if
need be. If the question has been
addressed, it may not be necessary for
members to proceed with a question for
further settings.
>> Please proceed.
>> E vaporizers, which were primarily
nicotine delivery devices, were banned
in Singapore ever since it was
introduced. In the first eight months of
this year, the Health Sciences Authority
or HSA detected almost 10,000 cases of
possession or use and 38 cases of supply
of eaporizers.
Amongst users, more than half are under
25 years old. However, e vaporizers now
carry more dangerous substances like
autoomidic and control drugs. This was
in fact one of the key considerations
when we banned the supply and use of e
vaporizers years ago and our fears has
unfortunately come true. This year HSA
detected 70 cases of possession or use
of e- vaporizers.
With e vaporizers the landscape of
substance abuse have changed. We
launched a whole of government response
which we announced on 28th August 2025.
The measures include the following.
First, curbing upstream import and
supply. Over 2,800 online
advertisements, including those found on
messaging platforms, were removed
between January and August this year.
Platforms have a legal responsibility to
detect and remove advertisements.
Those with inadequate processes will
face penalties, including fines and
imprisonment under the Tobacco Control
of Advertisements and Sales Act.
Number two, enhance border enforcement.
The HSA, Immigration and Checkpoints
Authority, Central Narcotics Bureau, and
Singapore Police Force work closely to
enforce against smuggling and syndicated
activities at our borders. They are also
sharing information with their foreign
counterparts within ASEAN. Today,
Singapore, Brunai, Thailand, Laos,
Cambodia have banned vaping. We are
pleased to learn that Malaysia is making
plans to do so too. With more regional
countries banning e- vaporizers, we can
be more effective in curbing this
harmful and addictive habit.
Third, listing of as a class C control
drug under the misuse of drugs act or
MDA. This has sent a clear and strong
public message by elevating the
penalties against related offenses.
Together with this, we now have over
10,000 officers empowered to enforce
against e- vaporizer related offenses.
Agencies have been conducting joint
rates at night sports and operations at
institutes of higher learning.
Public vigilance continues to be crucial
in enabling offenses to be detected. HSA
received over 4,600 hotline reports
between January and August and over
1,400 reports through the new online
form launched on 21st July. The online
form requires Syncpass lockin to prevent
spam and ensure report integrity,
especially if the reporting member of
public wants to upload photos of
offenders or locations of offense. For
those without Sing pass, such as those
under 15 years old, they can use the
telephone hotline.
Because of our strong stance against
substance abuse, it is unlikely that
production ofdate e vaporizers will take
root in Singapore. As for the question
of phasing outdidate in medical
settings,
remains a useful anesthetic agent,
particularly in emergencies for
intubation purposes, and we have no
plans to phase it out. Its handling has
been well controlled previously under
the poisons act and now under the MDA. I
mentioned earlier that e- vaporizers
have changed the landscape of substance
abuse. There are more young people
involved out of curiosity of succumbing
to peer pressure. We want to help this
group and have provided opportunities
for them to come forward and seek help
early. We have implemented the
following. First, the bin the vape
initiative. About 6,000 e vaporizers and
components were collected between the
one month July and August. These devices
have been properly disposed of. No
testing was done of their contents
because this will take up a lot of our
testing resources. Bin the vape was
meant to be a timelmited initiative. We
have since reduced the number of bins
and located them in specific locations
such as border checkpoints and where
rehabilitation programs are provided.
Second, we introduced or stepped up
rehabilitation programs namely the quit
vape and the IQ quit programs to support
users to kick the habit. From 1st to
14th September 74 persons have signed up
for these programs. Those who
voluntarily surrender e vaporizers,
including accommodate e- vaporizers and
seek help, will not be penalized for
doing so. This arrangement has continued
since 1st September 2025. But as for
those who are caught, rehabilitation
will be required for all e vaporizers
offenders and repeat eaporizers
offenders. The rehabilitation programs
are run by the Institute of Mental
Health, IMH, and social service agencies
such as we care community services and
Singapore anti-narcotics association who
have expertise in running sessation
programs. Schools and parents are
closely involved in the rehabilitation
programs process for youth including
counseling and supporting the youth. We
also need to step up preventive
education. We have launched a public
anti- vaping campaign.
Schools and IHLS are intensifying
educational efforts through school
curriculara assembly talks and
orientation briefings. Students learn
about the harms of vaping, recognize
impulsive and addictive behaviors, and
pick up strategies for self-control,
help seeking and managing negative peer
influences. The Ministry of Education is
also engaging parents including through
the parents gateway.
While we have listed it in the MDA, the
Ministry of Health is reviewing the
longerterm legislation needed to adapt
to this new landscape. The new
legislation will provide legal powers to
enforce against e vaporizers of all
kinds, provide for mandatory
rehabilitation and supervision regimes,
and set appropriate penalties for users
and suppliers. We plan to enact the new
legislation in the first quarter of 2026
to continue this to continue to support
this whole of government approach to
protect Singaporeans from the harmful
effects caused by eaporizers.
Mr.
Thank you speakers uh for allow me to
ask a PQS or SQ round because uh in this
house I've asked many PQs about vaping
since 2021
uh have some supplemental questions. The
first questions is small statistics. How
many uh vaping equipments and vaping uh
materials has been surrendered through
the beans and to voluntary purposes
since they started program? And uh
secondly, how many of um of people have
voluntary came to HSA for help uh
because they have already surrendered
baby equipments and need
rehabilitations.
And the third questions is that uh
moving on uh which ministry or
department will continue to coordinate
the effort against vaping uh because I
noted that uh the recent HSA annual
report uh in the in the front page by
the chairman there's no mention about
vaping. That's why I mentioned last
round in my SQ previously.
Minister
um as mentioned in my reply just now
6,000 vapes and their components have
been surrendered through the bind the
vape program. Uh more has been uh
surrendered earlier but we did not keep
track of them. As for voluntary
volunteers who gave up vapes since we
announced the new policy 74 have uh come
forward as I mentioned in my reply.
Which ministry will coordinate between
MHA and MO? We will work closely
together to coordinate. The landscape
have changed. Used to be people either
you smoke and vape or you take drugs.
Two separate set of people. But now you
have a vape device. It's a delivery
device that contain the drugs. The front
end is controlled by MO controlled
substance is regulated by MHA. So
landscape have changed. The two ministry
have to work closely together and
coordinate this.
>> Mr. Melvin Young.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh, I'd like to
ask the minister, I think in his answer,
he said vaping, uh, there's a high
number of youth caught for, uh, vaping
related offenses. According to news
reports, these youth are enticed to
vaping and, uh, peddling of vapes
through social social media channels. Id
like to ask how how well is our HSA
resourced to counter such tactics
employed by the uh vape trafficking uh
syndicates.
Minister,
>> I think the challenge is not one of
resource but through the internet and uh
messaging platforms, they proliferate
very easily and they do not necessarily
have a presence in Singapore for you to
be able to get hold of them and take
them to task. So it's a big cat and
mouse game. Uh we will continue to do
so. We have shut down so many of them. I
reported it in my reply. um and working
together with IMDA as well as the tech
platforms. But most importantly, the
culture of avoiding substance abuse must
take root in our society. So what has
been very um comforting is that ever
since we launched this new whole of
government approach to tackling atomic
vaping, the public has been very
supportive. Schools, institutions, SSAs,
uh even the youths amongst themselves
are very supportive. So we hope we
continue to uphold this behavior and
this culture and I think that is the
most best defense against substance
abuse.
I'm trying to see those who had asked PQ
PQs earlier I give priority if there
there aren't then I'll go to the rest.
Miss Bison.
Thank you, Minister.
The government has uh in in view of the
titan measures to um uh eradicate uh use
of vapes in Singapore, uh this also
cause a shift into under more
underground activities. What is the
government's measures to target this
group of uh sales of vapes, especially
the ones K-pots uh in the underground
activities?
Never think that just because we are
worried about underground activity so
therefore legalize and regulate. That's
how what other countries have done when
it comes to control drugs and look where
they are and look where we are. So I
think we have always taken a tough
stance against drugs. I don't know why
I'm answering this but I think it's the
correct approach to take. Things do go
underground and MHA with our laws with
our tough laws we'll take very tough
actions against them. So likewise formed
uh don't fall for harm reduction
arguments. Ban it and force it. Go on
the ground will go after you.
>> Associate Professor Jim Muslim.
>> Thank you speaker. You're much obliged.
I understand that I did not file a PQ on
this, but I'm just wondering if the
enhanced stance uh against vaping will
now in fact empower the SPF uh and not
just the HSA to apprehend individuals
reported uh to be using or distributing
vapes as because previously appeals I
had written on behalf of residents to
the SPF had been redirected. Uh the
concern however in doing so is twofold.
The presence of HSA officers presumably
is not as ubiquitous as that of the
police and HSA may not potentially have
sufficient resources to tackle uh the
search in cases is something that uh
member Melvin Yong had also raised
previously. I'm wondering perhaps it's
not uh within your ministry sir but I'm
wondering if you could have your
thoughts on that.
It's okay. We coordinate all these uh in
fact more than the SPF today. SPF, HSA,
ICA, CNB, NEA, LTA, education, casino
regulatory authority, all the officers
are empowered now uh to take actions
against related offenses. The the member
mentioned there were instances in the
past because it uh fell between the
legal cracks which is why there was a
point the SPF did not feel they are
empowered to enforce yet it falls under
HSA. HSA find that our penalties if we
catch someone possessing or using it the
penalties are not stringent enough which
is why we took the step of listing uh as
a class C drug in MDA. So we closed the
loophole but this is temporary. As I
mentioned early next year we want to
pass new legislation to make the
necessary provision to enforce against
this.
>> Mr. Christie Souza.
>> I thank the minister for his uh clear
response. I'd just like to reintroduce
uh Sububek's experience all those years
ago. Uh I remember we had to fill the
gap for Subutex and it took some time to
fill the gap for Subutex before we could
uh classify it as an illegal drug and
then take enforcement action. Um I just
see a little bit of similarity here uh
toite.
Um, I'm concerned at the level at at the
length of time it took HSA to classify
this as a class C classification drug.
Uh, I don't know the ins and outs of
HSA. There could be a number of reasons
why the experiments had to take so long
or the policy considerations, but I'd
like to know whether we had learned from
the subutex situation and whether or not
we could have been quicker in reducing
the amount of time it took to classify
automate as a class C drug cuz only then
can you come in and do all the
enforcement. Thank you,
Minister.
The classification of under MDA uh is
done under MHA. Um but I take the
membmber's point. We have to act as fast
as we can because the process do take
some time when the new substance enter a
community. You have to observe who is
taking it. Uh will it fizzle out or will
it start to take root and grow? Uh
kitamine for kitamine for example didn't
take root. uh at the same time we have
to observe the evidence clinical
evidence is it harm how harmful is it
how addictive is it and how dependent
someone becomes so all this take a bit
of time but I take the member's point we
have to act as quickly as we can
>> Mr. kind of deal.
>> There's a case in my division where the
child is hooked on K-pots and expelled
from school. Uh refuses all contact with
authorities. His parents want to know
what powers do authorities have to
enforce compulsory assessment and
rehabilitation for these youth that
refuse our help.
>> Minister,
the member wrote to me about this case.
This is one of those cases that fell
through the cracks during that
transition period. So now right now
withdate listed as MDA we close the
loophole. Next year we have a new
legislation
miss. So
>> thank you speaker. I have two SQS. One
is echoing from what um parliamentary
colleague Chris Duza have said. I would
like to ask whether apart from the
atomate lace vapes has the ministry
actually detected the use of other
unlawful or harmful substances as well
that may potentially be also eventually
classified.
Um the other PQ is pertaining to the
MO's um recent announcements on
introducing suspensions. uh in this
regard I would like to inquire whether
are we exploring for this suspensions to
be in-house which means it's within the
school rather than external as an effort
um to rehabilitate rehabilitate the
students better. This is following from
some of the feedbacks that we have
gathered um through the woodross anti-
vaping task force that we have been
engaging with the schools.
Minister
>> on the first question I assume the
member is asking whether there are other
substances that are delivered through e
vaporizers.
Uh we have seen them in other countries
cannabis for example. Um in Australia we
saw fentinel um so we have to observe
this uh carefully and as uh Mr. Duza
mentioned be very vigilant list them
quickly. Don't allow them to take root.
As for the next question about I think
uh
I answer on behalf of uh their their
measures are over and above what the law
has provided. So if a student are is
caught uh consuming uh using through
vaporizers he will be required to go
through the rehabilitation program
either IMH or one of our social services
agency's partners on top of that will
through their own in-house school
discipline system impose other
punishment such as suspension.
>> Mr. Dennisan
Ask
the uh minister to supplementary
question. Uh would it be possible to
include etominidates precursors under
the precursors uh control list? Uh
number two, how do we ensure that the
medical alternatives for it to date do
not get abused by drug addicts as an
easy substitute? Thank you,
>> Minister.
precursors. I assume you meant the
derivatives of autotominate. They all
listed as part of the uh class class C M
uh class C drug under MDA. They have
already been listed. Uh but if we have
missed out something, do let us know and
we we will include them. Uh second
question, I
I think we just have to be tough on all
forms of substance abuse so that one
doesn't become the substitute of the
other. This is an area MHA obviously
know a lot better. But I think right now
as I mentioned e vaporizers changes the
landscape. Now we got something very
recreational a delivery device from
delivering litechi flavored nicotine to
accommodate to something to cannabis. So
you have a range of stuff that can be
delivered through this device. When
someone is vape uh using a vape you
don't know what is he or she consuming.
So because of that MHA, MO have to work
closely together so that we cover all
bases. So whatever substance abuse is
out there, we take firm action against
them so one does not become substitute
for the other.
>> Dr. Hamemed Raza.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'd like to ask
the minister if um Singapore has raised
the issue of uh e- vapor product control
in AAN forums and what the responses
from our neighbors been and whether any
uh collaborations have emerged. Uh thus
far
>> we have had some informal consultations
and we hope ASEAN at some point can take
a con concert consulted stance. Yeah,
this is something that we want to work
towards. In the meantime, we do see more
and more ASEAN countries are banning
vapes. Malaysia being the latest to do
to attempt to do so. Uh and we'll share
our information share information our
experiences with them. Hopefully at some
point we'll have a stronger Assean
common stance.
>> Mr. Victor Lai.
>> Thank you speaker. Minister to the
extent that smoking is a precursor to
vaping and with the clampdown on vaping
does the ministry intend to take a
tighter stance against smoking
especially among our young?
>> The good thing is that smoking
prevalence has been dropping in
Singapore continuously. The latest
survey showed that prevalence amongst
adults, adults naming 15 and above is
8.8%. It's a historical low and one of
the lowest in the world. Um, we will
continue to encourage people not to
smoke and people are Singaporeans are
responding to it. Uh, we we should also
remember uh tobacco has been around 200
years. Yeah. And when it first started,
people do not know the harm that it can
cause. Of course today we know but he
has taken root and become part of
society behavior but we have to continue
to work on reducing the prevalence of
smoking.
We have many PQs in this list so I'm
going to give this one last uh SQ from
Dr. Wizar.
>> Thank you Mr. Speaker for indulgence. Uh
minister you mentioned the involvement
of IMH uh in this efforts to reduce our
vaping issues. Uh we we clearly know IMH
is very much involved with rehab and
sessation programs too. With this
expansion, how will it affect IMH's uh
oper operational ability given that we
do have many cases of mental health also
uh requiring attention and especially we
see a surge in youth numbers coming
forth which is a good thing but it also
affects the system. Uh second second
with regards to are there plans for IMH
to design dedicated youth focused
programs apart from the adult ones
because we know that they respond
differently to such and uh uh different
such therapeutic approaches. Thanks.
>> Um IMH does a lot of things different
departments. So the department for
sessation which is called NAMS um they
have their dedicated resources. So they
will not be using resources uh that are
used to um treat or to to help uh mental
mental illness cases. Uh that said uh we
are just starting our operation. If
there's a need for more resources, we
will beef them up. As for youth, uh we
are working closely with MSF and the
social services agencies such as we care
uh such as Fyet who has experience
working with youth and they are already
starting to uh they are already starting
operations on sessation programs for
youth.
>> Uh moving on, Mr. Pongwing
[Music]
Oh, I saw.
>> Mr. Speaker, may I have the your
permission to answer PQS 12 to 16
together?
>> Please proceed.
Sir, we have stepped up enforcement at
the borders to deter trafficking of
rapes. Between 15th September 2024 to
14th September 2025, the immigration and
checkpoints authority intercepted 76
attempts of large scale smuggling of
vapes and related products at the
checkpoints and 57 attempts through the
postal channels.
The Singapore Police Force and Central
Narcotics Bureau CNB are conducting
inland operations against vape
trafficking syndicates.
On 10th September, CNB dismantle a
syndicate dealing in tobidate lace vapes
and arrested eight members of the
syndicate.
Extr territorial jurisdiction of the
misuse of drugs act or MDA was
introduced in 1998 to prevent local
addicts from being able to travel
overseas to abuse drugs. Under section
8A of the MDA, Singapore citizens and
permanent residents who are found to
have abused controlled drugs outside
Singapore will be dealt with as if that
offense had been committed in Singapore.
With the temporary listing of itate and
its analoges at as class C controlled
drugs, the same provision will apply to
those who abuse it overseas.
As for the question of youth abusing
vapes containing containing controlled
substances,
schools and institutes of higher
learning IHLS have been engaging
students on the health risk and
illegality of vapes through the school
curriculum and compulsory IHL
orientation e- modules.
CNV has also included in its ongoing
preventive drug education efforts aimed
at youths.
These efforts complement the national
public education campaign coordinated by
the Ministry of Digital Development and
Information.
>> Mr. Hip.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the
minister for his reply. With the Joho
economic zone moving closer to reality
and the plan seamless MRT link between
Singapore and Joho Baru, does the
government anticipate an increased risk
of illicit substances such as vapes
being trafficked across our borders? And
what enhanced detection capabilities
does a have to detect vapes or related
components at our checkpoints? Thank
you,
>> acting minister.
>> So I thank the member for the SQ. So
indeed the RTS will facilitate the
movement of conveyance between Singapore
and uh Johobaru. So with this
convenience you can anticipate uh some
travelers who may want to take advantage
uh of the ease of movement to uh smuggle
in contraband. So as such we have a uh
operational response plan in place where
we
will enhance the way we do things at the
RTS at looking at some of the uh maybe
perceived gaps and at the same time we
want to make sure that uh it doesn't
inconvenient the travelers as much. So
we will deploy CMBB and uh police
officers uh there together with the A to
see how we can uh not only apprehend the
person doing this and also to ensure uh
to give the the the the the feeling that
is safe and secure at our borders.
>> Mr. Mayong.
>> Uh thank you Mr. Speaker. I I thank the
minister for his assurance, but I'm
quite concerned to read a recent uh CNA
article on the 11th of September that
reported how vape shops in Joho Baru say
that uh Singaporeans still form uh the
bulk of their customers and uh checks at
our our checkpoints uh uh despite all
the enhanced penalties, the Koreans are
still willing to take on uh these risks
to smuggle vapes into Singapore. So I'd
like to ask the minister two two
question. One, what is the total
quantity of uh e vaporizers and uh
related products uh detected uh in the
cases intercepted at our checkpoints uh
in the past one year and uh whether the
penalties for smuggling uh vapes vapes
into Singapore can be further increased
so that uh we can uh do more to deter uh
such vapes from entering our shores.
SMS
>> pleasure.
I thank the member for the SQ and uh
answering your second SQ uh during that
period uh that I've shared uh
authorities have ceased more than
500,000
uh e vaporizers and related components
across the cases that I have shared.
And uh what is key is that uh we as what
shared by minister earlier we have the
whole of government effort right it's
not only looking at babes but also
looking at and any other substance that
may be brought into Singapore and uh so
since the first of September right where
we listed
uh class see this thing. Uh so what
happened is that our ground sensing
indicated that uh there has been uh a
reduction right uh and the uh
intermediate
traffickers are more wary about the
situation and how our en enhanced
enforcement effort and so there are
those who have stopped dealing with it.
Well, there are also those who still
want to take the risk. They feel that
there's demand and we will continue to
take action against them. So, just uh
two weeks ago, we arrested eight members
of uh intermediate syndicates and we
will continue to monitor the situation.
So we also need the help of fellow
Singaporeans and our members here so
that we can not only
take the necessary action but I think go
upstream to share with fellow
Singaporeans especially our young people
that these are harmful for them
and we protect our people so that they
have better lives ahead and continue to
keep Singapore safe and secure.
>> Mr. Christy Souza,
>> I thank the minister for his uh clear
responses.
My PQs u are born out of my
understanding of the MDA. The MDA is
effective. It's u it's an excellent tool
to combat uh drugs provided
the drug is classified in a certain
schedule and here class C. And
the last time we had a lot of difficulty
with uh crossborder importation of drugs
was uh NPSS new psychoactive substances.
In fact, the minister and I had a debate
about this in a motion.
So my concern is that look, we don't
know what's beyond the horizon. My
question is how can we make the system
more efficient and effective so that if
some new psychoactive substances new
some new drug comes up on the market we
are able to have MHA and MO work
together get it under the class C and
therefore administered because without
it being a scheduled drug we cannot
consider them the people who traffic as
traffickers the people who consume as
consumers. So it is critical in the
legal stratosphere to have this
efficiently, effectively and promptly
scheduled as a class C drug. That is my
genuine concern. I want to know why it
took so long for a toy date to be
classified as a class C drug and what
more can we do in future
to plug this gap and be more efficient
in enforcement. Thank you. It's a mess
pressure.
So I thank the member for the SQ. Uh
Minister has shared his view and I
concur with this view that yes we will
continue to uh make sure that we are
quick and also we uh are able to address
the issue uh with regards to the new uh
types of substance that come on board.
However, the reality is if you look
globally, this is something that
governments around the world across the
world are hand handling this issue
whereby for us we have a strong stance
and that is a protection for our system.
Nevertheless, even with a strong stance,
the traffickers syndicates will always
find opportunities to slip in. And what
about those without a strong stance? So
you can imagine how their people are
affected by not only drugs, control
drugs, but also substances that can give
them a very very even short time or a
level of highness that will keep them
addicted to it. So we will continue to
look at the MDA. I as the member shared,
we have enhanced how we deal with NPS,
right? This is something that we will
continue to uh look at the landscape and
see what ways we can continue to
strengthen it. So I sure I assure the
member that we are in this very
seriously. Why? Because we have seen how
in other parts of the world many
countries
not only got affected they turned into
narco state
because they were taking very light
stance on it. They felt initially
nothing will happen to them. Right. This
whole idea of the syndicates trafficking
and how they
introduce substances and drugs into the
society quietly underground and when you
come to know about it, you realize it's
too late and it's going to be very
difficult. And I've met many of my
counterparts who were taken by surprise
not knowing what to what is to come. So
we are on a right path and we want to
get the support of all the members here
and fellow Singaporean so that we can
continue to do this
protect our people together.
Miss Mariam Jaffa
Um thank you minister. I have two SQs.
Um the first SQ is around postal
channels. I understand that some of the
recent raids uh arose out of reports by
uh Koua staff who discovered um vapes or
atoms base and actually in uh um in the
parcels that they were delivering. Um
and I would like to know um how are the
Koua and parcel companies being uh
engaged and listed to assist in in um
detecting um and reporting uh the issue
of vapes beyond in especially those that
have probably slipped through our border
controls um um before. My second SQ is
how is technology being used to screen
um for vapes in um in small parcels.
Thank you SMS.
So I thank the member for the SQ indeed
very important SQ because uh many of our
products or even services uh undertaken
at this platform that is the uh postal
channels and uh all inbound uh postal
articles are subjected to screening by
IC officers with the aid of screening
equipment uh such as ash ray scanners.
So upon detection of any e vaporizers or
related components, the article will be
referred to HSA for further
investigation. And you may be interested
to know that uh during the period I
shared from 15th September 2024 to 14
September 2025, we have seized more than
3,000 e vaporizers and related
components across these cases.
Mr. Beckham
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I'm just picking
up on a point that I think minister made
earlier, but which comes within MHA's
prerogative. I think minister was
mentioning that a lot of vapes are sold
through uh social media, potentially
telegram. Does MHA think it has adequate
tools to deal with sale through social
media and whether any more tools are
needed?
SMS wa
>> I thank the member for the SQ yes we are
in the social media space right and
that's how we have been able to
dismantle many of the syndicates and we
will continue to do so and it this is a
platform where it really has developed
tremendously and it also changes very
fast so uh CNB as well as our agencies
is we continue to uh develop our our not
only the platform but how we can be more
effective right in uh in our enforcement
and at the same time going upstream on
that
>> Mr. David Ho
>> thank you Mr. Speaker sir to I have two
SQS. The first one being whether um
sorry
the first one being whether for for
those youths um okay sorry give me a
minute.
Okay Mr. Apologies Mr. Speaker. So my
two asks are this. The first being um so
these are questions from parents whether
for youth that actually consume um
vaping overseas what is our position on
it similar to um those uh when the youth
consume cannabis that being the first
question. Um the second ask you it's
about reporting earlier member mentioned
that uh a lot of this can be they can
purchase it online. Uh but what then we
also realize that for those youth that
are below 15 years old um if all this
are online platforms we wonder whether
if there's an appropriate plat youth
platform for the youth to be able to
report
>> minister
>> thank you uh just the first question
simple answer is you consume it overseas
as a class C drug under MDA uh you are
still liable for penalty that is the
position we take for all drugs Second is
for use without sing pass use the
telephone. I know there were instances
when the operator on the line say can
you please uh send it via the form
probably because in the course of the
conversation the youth might have said
that I got photos to show because once
you have photos you got to go to the
actual form which then require sync pass
but if you don't have sync pass just
tell them um just tell the operator I
have a case to report it will be
admitted and we'll take uh action
appropriately. I just want to touch on
the point that Mr. Duza raised earlier
about being fast and I and I take that
point totally. We are going to come to
the house to propose a new legislation
under MO. Yeah. It can be new or it can
be amendment or existing legislation but
it will be provide us with the legal
powers to act faster. Yeah. Even in the
absence of total of comprehensive
clinical data on harm, on addiction, on
dependence, we can take action first
under MO powers with the collaboration
of other agencies to to require mandated
rehab, mandated supervision. So I think
with uh more legislation, it is a matter
of legislation uh the legislation do
provide for faster uh response and I
think with the new legislation coming
next year do debate on it give us your
perspective I think will improve the
situation
>> SMS do you want to add anything?
No. Okay. I'm going to move on uh to the
next PQ Mr. David Ho.
>> It should be question 17, I think.
>> Question 17.
>> Mr. Speaker, sir, the Ministry of Health
and the High Health Sciences Authority
have assessed that the current reporting
channels for vaping related offenses are
adequate. Since July 2025, HSA has
extended its hotline operating hours for
reporting vaping related offenses to 7
days a week from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
HSA has also launched an online
reporting form to complement its
hotlines. was answered earlier on with
the preceding Pichu. Where necessary, Mo
and HSA will work with relevant agencies
including the municipal services office
to explore other means to enhance the
reach and accessibility of vape
reporting channels. Separately, MSO's
one service municipal case reporting
function is also available as an AI
enabled chatbot on WhatsApp, Telegram,
and Instagram Messenger. Now these
channels complement our one service app
and do not require sync pass
authentication.
The chatbot is also hosted on social
messaging platforms which are familiar
to youths and seniors alike which makes
it even more convenient for residents to
provide feedback on municipal issues.
And MSO is also studying how to enhance
our chatbot to take in and process
feedback given in vernacular languages.
Miss something,
>> may I seek a permission to take PQ
number 18 together with the two related
PQs by Mr. S Yao Tren and Miss Polyan
that are scheduled for later sittings.
In addition, I'll address two written
PQs filed by Mr. Futang and Mr. Sha Lo
for the 22nd and 25th September sittings
respectively. These five PQs relate to
PUB's lapses highlighted in the recent
auditor general's office report. I will
respond to these questions together so
that I can give a comprehensive reply.
If the members are satisfied with the
reply given, they may wish to withdraw
their PQs.
>> Please proceed.
>> Thank you. My ministry takes the AGO
findings seriously and has conducted
comprehensive internal investigations
into the contract management lapses
contained in the report. AGO raised
concerns over the authenticity of
quotations provided for 23 items of
variation works or star rate items under
a construction contract for watercape
works which amounted to a total value of
$148,900.
PUB has reported the matter to the
police to investigate if there were any
fraudulent practices involved. It has
also conducted a thorough review of
similar contracts and did not find such
irreg irregularities.
It will follow up with its own
disciplinary actions should the police
investig investigations uncover any
wrongdoing.
As for the case of documentation
falsification for the contract on supply
of virite, PUB has completed its
internal investigation and found this to
be the fault of an individual officer.
The certificates of analysis COAs were
altered to include required information
which has been omitted. The alterations
were done to cover up the incompleteness
of the original documents to be provided
to the AGO auditors but the contents
were factual. It has issued a formal
reprimand to the officer and will be
downgrading the officer's performance
grade on AGO findings of the lack of
comprehensive coverage of maintenance
contracts for PUB's water quality
analyzers at private sector plants.
It was already working on addressing the
gap before the AGO audit. It has since
addressed the issue by using its other
contracts to cover the scope of work. It
installed water quality analyzers as
additional precautionary checks over and
above the analyzers installed by the
private sector operators. The results of
the analyzers checked daily cross check
daily with water sampling tests. I would
like to assure the house that PUB has
instituted adequate checks to ensure the
delivery of clean water that is safe to
drink. On the lapses related to supply
of stocks, PUB has identified the root
causes to be individual officers not
being diligent in carrying out the reg
required checks and inadequate
supervision to enforce the requirements
stipulated under the contracts including
verification of documents submitted by
the contractors. It has taken
appropriate disciplinary action against
the six officers involved.
PUB has taken the following steps to
strengthen its processes. First, it has
increased the scope of its internal
audits on procurement and contract
management. This includes additional
checks on star rates in contract
variations and use of digital tools
including AI to improve checks on
contractual requirements and detect
fraud.
Second, PUB has tightened the standard
operating procedures SOPs for contract
management to ensure alignment with
contractual requirements such as
requiring the submission of the original
certificates of analysis. It has also
tightened its SOPs for checks on the
quality of the stocks used in its
operations. It has confirmed that the
quality of the stocks that it has
received earlier met its requirements.
It will take appropriate action against
contractors who fail to meet their
obligations, including those who submit
non-compliance certificate of analysis
where feasible. It is automating
processes to reduce reliance on manual
monitoring and the risk of human error.
Finally, PUB will continue to share the
lessons arising from AGO's finding with
all staff as part of the regular staff
training and communications on
procurement and contract management.
Mr. Sandin
>> and uh thank you Min for your reply as
well. I have two follow-up SQS. Uh the
first is I note that there were several
individual officers involved and other
than the disciplinary actions taken
against these individual officers uh
will the ministry also consider moving
upstream uh to conduct for example
refresher training uh across the board
as well as employing perhaps digital
automated or AI means upstream um beyond
just uh on the audit. Um the second SQ I
have is whether any of this impacts um
the kind of speed and uh prog projects
that are um under these contracts. Thank
you
>> minister who
>> speaker uh the short answer to both of
uh the question the first the short
answer to the first question is no. I
think the question has two parts. One is
whether there will be training involved
on other officers including those that
are more senior. The answer is yes. And
will there be automation? Yes, as I've
mentioned in my reply, we will looked at
where technology is helpful to help
manage help staff manage the contract
requirements. And as to speed of
implementation, that's definitely not
something that uh you know we want to uh
compromise on. This this audit and this
report has given PUB many good lessons
and we like to implement and run a title
ship without implementing the
effectiveness of the agency.
>> Mr. Chair,
>> thank you Mr. Speaker. I I wish to state
that um PUB as our national water agency
has a critical mission of ensuring
Singapore's water security and I think
is it it is also important to state for
the record that in my view PUB has
excelled in this mission by boldly
innovating. So my question really is in
the wake of the AGO's findings and PUB's
response to Titan processes, how will
PUB also ensure that it preserves and
indeed continues to grow this spirit of
innovation, of boldness or mission
focus. Thank you,
>> Minister Pu.
>> Thank you very much. Uh I thank members
here Yaoan for giving POB's uh
endorsements of his performance. I would
like to assure members that uh PUB will
continue to do its work being the water
agency and take pride in what it does
for the country in terms of assuring our
water safety and security. In fact, uh
this report has told us that innovation
can be undertaken in areas such as
operations in procurement and I think
with more application of appropriate
technology our offices can be more
effective and therefore relieve them for
the m from the mundane work so that they
can focus on more strategic and more
important functions.
>> Mr. P.
>> Thank you Mr. Mr. Speaker, uh Mr.
Speaker, I would like to ask the
minister whether in view of the lapses,
whether the ministry has considered
whether the workload of the officers is
a contributing factor to the lapses
because as we understand contracts, the
number of contracts that each officer
has to deal with has to deal with it
could be very copious. So I would like
to check the minister's response. Thank
you
>> Minister.
Uh I think indeed thank you very much uh
to members questions and care of concern
for officers uh in PUB. Uh I would like
to say that the findings that have um
shown up in this audit uh reflected
lapses not so much because there's
voluminous uh amount of work but rather
in some of the processes that has been
unclear and not properly carried
forward. In any case, if there are I
think crunches in terms of resources, I
think officers uh are told I've been
told that they are able to re raise
these issues with their supervisors. But
more importantly, I go back to my point.
I think there are technologies that can
help us to make our um operations a lot
more automated and also less prone to
human errors.
>> Last SQ Mr. Jeanlu.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There were two
types of errors here that were
discovered by the AGO. One was human
error, but the other one was more
serious, which was a lack of integrity
resulting in the falsification of
documents. So my question to the
minister is whether in the reprimand
framework of PUB, is there a difference
between the two? because in her reply
both officers were reprimanded. And if
there's a difference, do we then treat a
lack of integrity with more seriousness?
Thank you.
>> Minister who?
>> Um I think that it may not be clear as
to which of the findings were lack of
integrity. I think there's one that's
being mentioned in the report about uh
possible uh um accuracy or um um
accuracy in the rates that's being used
in the variation order that is being
investigated. We have withholding our um
assessment uh at this point in time
pending the outcome of investigation.
The other issue with falsification
actually it is an alteration uh a staff
has basically audited a document in
order to provide completeness uh of
information on that document. Uh we have
found that the facts were not um um
misrepresented. Uh actually the
documents were factual. So actually
there was an error of the the error of
judgment of the staff's part to use a
way of alteration to provide the
information that's required by AGO.
There wasn't any suffering of in terms
of financial uh or or other issues or
operational issues that the agency have
have received. So on that note uh and
really reviewing the the guidelines and
the regulations that the public service
have adopted we have decided that uh
reprimand and downgrading uh of his
performance grade is the right uh
outcome for him.
>> Misan lass.
>> Thank you speaker. Thank you minister.
May I know if uh PUB or MSSE will be
reooking at the panel of contractors POB
typically uses uh particularly the very
specialized ones especially and also the
star rate contractors in view of these
findings.
Um as I say the investigation is ongoing
the there's no uh grounds for us to uh
doubt the integrity of parties that's
involved but should the outcome of the
investigation showed that you know there
has been intention to defraud the agency
will definitely do the appropriate
action uh with regard to the contractor
that's involved. Having said that, PUB
will always review the contractors uh
from time to time looking at its ability
to support to supply and support the
operations of the agencies.
We wondering question.
Mr. Speaker, I seek your permission to
take the following six questions 19 to
24 together. There are total of 18
parliamentary questions filed on real
reliability for this week's sittings.
For today, I will respond on this issue
more generally before addressing the
specific incidents that members have
asked about and thereafter I invite
members who have filed questions for
this as well as future sittings to seek
clarifications and if sufficiently
addressed, members may wish to withdraw
their questions filed for subsequent
sittings.
Mr. Speaker sir,
>> please proceed.
>> Thank you. Let me begin.
Mr. Tempaling and Mr. Yeponing have
noted that our real reliability as
measured by mean kilometers between
failure or MKBF is at its lowest since
2020.
In 2017, then Minister for Transport Mr.
Corbunwan set an NKBF target of 1
million train kilometers between delays
exceeding 5 minutes. We surpassed this
target in 2019 and we have remained
above it ever since.
This number for the 12-month period
leading up to August 2025 is
approximately 1.7 million train km and
this is lower than our peak MKBF of over
2 million in 2022 and 2023 but still
higher than 1 million target.
Mr. Shahut Taha asked how our MKBF
compares internationally.
Using MKBF and other indicators where
comparisons are available, our MRT
remains one of the most reliable in the
world.
Singapore's MKBF in recent years is
higher than Hong Kong MTRs, though lower
than Taipei metros.
For the number of service delays
exceeding 30 minutes per million train
kilometers, our MRT performs about the
same as metros in Tokyo and other
Japanese cities.
I've asked LTA to publish these
comparisons regularly because
Singaporeans often compare our MRT to
these systems.
Our journey to achieve 1 million train
kilometers was by no means easy. It was
the result of years of hard work by
thousands of people including many
engineers, technicians, and service
staff who work day and night to keep our
train services running.
I want to thank Miss Yoan Ling for
asking about the work hours, the safety
and well-being of our real workers,
many of whom are Singaporeans.
Real operators are required to ensure
that workers maintain appropriate rest
periods and there are strict controls to
prevent excessive overtime and I assure
missio that we take the safety and the
well-being of our real transport workers
very seriously
and I myself have personally visited
workers often since I became transport
minister. They are part of my one
transport team and I'm committed to
taking good care of them.
Should we set an even higher target for
MKBF? Mr. Shario asked this
is a reasonable question. But beyond 1
million train kilometers, actually
variations in the MKBF become less
meaningful. And this is because the
number of disruptions per year are very
small. Let me give you an example. For
the downtown line, the maximum MKBF is
about 8 million train kilometers. It
achieved it in 2023 and 2024. but just
one additional delay half it to 4
million. Another drawback of the MKBF
indicator is that it does not really
measure the length of the disruption and
hence the impact on the commuter.
For example, a complete service stoppage
is treated the same as more frequent
minor incidents even when trains are
moving and passengers are able to carry
on with their journeys.
The LTA does cons consider commuter
impact in the financial penalties that
imposed on operators for serious
disruptions. And to Mr. Luis Tu's
question, LTA has imposed an average of
around four such penalties per year in
the past 5 years.
We also use other measures to track the
performance of our rail network. Some of
these are published such as the delays
more than 30 minutes which I mentioned
earlier. And there are other indicators
such as the punctuality of trains
reaching each terminal station and the
proportion of scheduled mileage traveled
by revenue trains and LTA tracks these
too. I've asked LTA to share more of
such data publicly even though they are
fairly technical so that interested
commuters and colleagues can have a
better and fuller picture of our
performance. We will be transparent
because we have a good system and we
have nothing to hide.
I want to assure members that I take
every single real incident very
seriously. I'm personally alerted
whenever there is a train incident even
when it's late into the night or during
engineering hours. And we want to be
accountable to commuters because this
means that when an incident happens we
will learn from it. We will do our
utmost to prevent similar faults from
recurring. And accountability is also
why I asked LTA last Friday to put out
the whole list of incidents that have
happened since July this year with our
assessment on the causes and how these
problems were or are being resolved.
As members have also asked questions on
specific incidents, I will cover this
very briefly in the interest of time and
invite members to ask or or rather to
invite members to refer to LTA's news
release last Friday for further details.
Miss Yo, Miss Polyan, Mr. Uni Ming, and
associate professor Jameus Lim asked
about breakdowns for the northeast line
and the Sang Pongo LRT in August. As LTA
had explained, two faults occurred at a
substation at Singong Depo on 12th of
August, which cuts off power to several
parts of the Northeast line and SPLRT.
Works to repair the damage commenced
that night. Unfortunately, before the
repair could be completed, a damaged
cable caused a separate power fault on
the LRT 3 days later.
Miss Paul asked why it took a longer
time to recover service on the LRT on
the 12th of August. And this was because
LTA and SPST had to take some time to
determine that it was fully safe for the
power to be turned on. The root cause of
these faults are still being
investigated. The faulty components have
been sent to the manufacturer for checks
and LTA is also investigating whether
there were any lapses in maintenance and
if so this will in this will result in
regulatory action.
I want to also assure members that
immediate action has been taken to avoid
a recurrence. LTA and SVST have tested
cables along the entire SPLRT network
and will replace all voltage transformer
panels across the northeastline intake
substations.
And we have already planned to install a
secondary power supply source at Sang
Art Depo by the end of this year which
will provide further redundancy.
Mr. Edward Cha and Mr. Langua asked
about our findings on the two Bukip
Panjang LRT incidents in July. We have
traced both incidents to a
malfunctioning network switch. As the
switch was intermittently functioning,
the defect was only discovered after the
second incident.
Mr. Lang asked if the disruption could
have been avoided. As the network switch
was well within its design life, the
malfunction unfortunately was not
anticipated.
But this defective switch has been
replaced and sent to the manufacturer
for investigation.
LTA and SMRT have also put in additional
measures to detect such network
instability in the future and enable the
power system to automatically recover in
such instances.
Mr. Jackson Lam and Miss Rachel Ang
asked about incidents on the north,
south, and the east west lines. The
incident on the east west line on the
morning of 6th of August was caused by a
faulty point machine near Jurong East
station, one of our busier stations.
Point mach point machines physically
move the rails so that trains can
transfer from one track to another. And
therefore for safety reasons train had
to be slowed down until after the
morning peak when the point machine
could be fixed and this resulted in more
crowding than usual during the morning
peak hours.
Mr. Lamb asked about maintenance regime
for point machines and whether we could
have picked up the fault earlier.
Operators do carry out periodic
inspections and comprehensive regular
overhaul including functional tests as
per industry best practices.
Unfortunately, the fault on 6th of
August was detected just before the
start of service and could not be
resolved by the morning peak
on the separate incident on the north
south line on 2nd September. This was
called caused rather by a stalled train
which had to be physically pushed out to
Canbor station to disembark passengers.
The problem was traced to a faulty
connector which has since been replaced.
Mr. Jackson Lamb also asked about the
number of signaling related disruptions
on the north south line in the past
year. There was only one such delay on
the 13th of June where the traveling
time between Angokyo and Chwukang was
extended by 15 minutes and normal
service resumed within an hour.
These recent incidents happened across
different MRT lines with different
causes. But we want to take a harder
look to satisfy ourselves that there is
no systemic problem. And that is why I
announced last week that I had tasked
the chief executive of the land
transport authority, Mr. Anglang, to
chair a rail reliability task force
which will include the CEOs of the two
MRT operators, Mr. Nan Hunping of SMRT
and Mr. Jeffrey Sim of SBST.
This task force was focused on three
areas. First, it will bring forward the
renewal of critical components,
especially power supply and signaling
for the northeast line and the circle
line. Second, it will jointly conduct
audits on the maintenance and operations
of critical systems including
maintenance processes as well and staff
training.
Third, it will review service recovery
processes so that we can better support
commuters who are caught in a train
disruption.
And here the train operators have been
informing commuters of service delays in
excess of 10 minutes as required by the
LTA. And in response to Mr. Lewis Tr's
question, the LTA has not had to impose
any penalties on this in the last five
years.
But this is still only a basic
requirement and I think we can do
better. For instance, commuters should
have more precise information on
alternative transport routes and
additional travel time depending on
their specific location rather than
through generic advisories.
And they should also be able to get the
information at a single centralized
location, possibly on a single app, so
that they know exactly where to look
during a stressful disruption. These
things we can improve as well as
physical things like directional signs
and officer discretion on the ground or
officer reactions on the ground.
Mr. Speaker, the recent disruptions have
inconvenienced many commuters. I
understand the frustrations and I want
to assure commuters that we are doing
our best to improve our performance.
We know we can do better because our
real reliability has indeed been better
in the last few years.
But even with the recent disruptions,
our MRT system remains one of the most
reliable in the world.
Train delays happen in every system in
every city. Our phones, our computers
have to be restarted every now and then.
Cars will break down too.
So will our trains.
We want to absolutely minimize
disruptions because of the inconvenience
to commuters and we will work doubly
hard to do so. But what is equally
important is when a disruption
inevitably happens, we can support
commuters and guide them to continuing
their journeys safely with their
understanding and cooperation. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
>> Mingling.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While we wait
for the assessment from the LTA and the
real reliability task force, I note that
the SP LRT reliability is being closely
monitored and our transport and
maintenance workers are working hard to
maintain high reliability for our
commuters. With an aging infrastructure
and higher commuter demands with the new
Pongo infrastructure like the PDD and
the SIT uh coming online, how could the
ministry support uh and resource our
operators better on top of creating
redund redundancy systems as minister
has updated to implement safety and
condition monitoring systems? How can we
also ensure that our workers are
equipped with the latest skills and
knowledge especially with the real
manpower development package that looks
into upskilling our workers come to a
funding end.
>> The minister Jeffrey
>> thank you miss for your question Mr.
Speaker sir,
we have been working very closely with
the unions and with the uh rail
operators on making sure that we are not
just upgrading the hardware of the
systems but also the software. We want
to make sure that the workers who are
working on maintaining train reliability
are of the right capabilities of the
right skills and also are able to manage
the new systems that are come coming on
board as we upgrade the systems with new
technology new capabilities are needed
and that is why the fund that uh Miss Yo
mentioned has been very useful for us to
support the workers who are then able to
uh deal with these uh uh new systems and
to maintain them well. The operators
also have a uh rail reliability fund
which we work with them to try to
encourage them with incentives to focus
on training their workers, building up
their capabilities, ensuring that
they're able to do the things that they
need to do. So all in all, I think there
is a collaborative effort. We are
working very hard with the support of
the unions to make sure that uh the
workforce is capable and can do the
things that we need them to do every day
every night. Thank you Mr. Leonga.
>> Thank you sir. I thank the minister for
sharing on the technical details of the
breakdown of the BPRT. uh we are all now
too familiar with the inherent technical
challenges that the BPRT system has and
we do appreciate it does it is operating
in a pretty challenging uh terrain
ground terrain there in Pug Panjang but
uh so in that context I want to ask the
minister uh whether LTA uh will consider
uh adding more buses to run parallel to
the BBRRT system uh as a way to enhance
resiliency and also as a measure to cope
with the increasing ridership uh as a
town's population is also increasing
minister.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you,
Mr. Lang, for your question. Indeed, uh
Mr. Lang and I are both very familiar
with uh the ins and outs literally of
the BPRT for a number of reasons. we
were together uh working at uh on
transport issues a decade ago and I have
as much vested interest if not more
since BPRT passes both our
constituencies. Um I want to thank him
for his suggestion. The BPRT reliability
has generally improved I think over the
years. It is a unique system. It was
retroactively fitted in unlike the S spr
which is built from scratch and over the
last 10 years in fact we have been
working on a systemic upgrade of the RRT
the power system the trains we are
almost complete and I think the results
are showing the reliability has indeed
been better as for bus services today
there are already several bus services
that run parallel to or complement the
LRT for example I think service 976 was
launched in 2019 19 specifically to
support commuters during the renewal
works and together with service 974.
These services connect Chachukang and
Bukit Pangjang interchanges and serve
many of the same neighborhoods as the
LRT. We also have services 920922
and 972 which provide alternative
connections, first mile last mile
connections within BKIPA. I can I will
certainly review your suggestion to
introduce more parallel run bus services
but uh we'll have to consider other
factors like ridership availability of
bus captains as you know which is a key
constraint for us as well as uh to
prioritize these uh relative to requests
for bus services in other areas. Thank
you Mr. Lewis Cha.
Thank you speaker. Just two SQs for the
minister. The first in relation to the
question on the um penalties and the
incidents specifically I understand that
the in relation to last year's east west
line uh breakdown for about 6 days. I
think the penalty was reduced from 2
million to 2.4 million. And I wanted to
double check because I think specific
specifically on the RTS act um the
operators can be fined a maximum of one
higher of 1 million or 10% of the fair
revenues and so with a reduction in the
fine uh would the minister be concerned
that the deterrent effect would actually
be lessened as a result and secondly the
second excuse in relation to the 15 key
incidents that the LTA has put out last
Friday for these incidents I note that
the LT TA or the government will be
putting in an additional $1 billion uh
to raise the reliability and maintenance
uh standards. What is the corresponding
requirements on the part of each of the
operators in terms of the additional
investments that they may have to put in
and at the same time given the incidents
the ministry's uh view on the financial
penalties that may be imposed. Thank
you.
>> Thank
you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you Mr. for
your questions. You have two questions.
Let me just take the second one. First
on the financial penalties and how what
is the responsibility of the PTO's um in
terms of uh uh
using the $1 billion and what is their
financial commitment? Well, um before to
do that, I would just sort of briefly
explain how the LTA assesses penalties.
We assess the financial penalties for
very serious disruptions and we do so
looking at the culpability of the
operators in terms of their uh
contribution to that uh environment.
Sometimes it's not not the PTO's uh uh
doing sometimes there are in situations
where it's human error or there people
you know for example doing passengers
doing things is not nothing to do with
the operators and they may cause a
disruption but it does not affect the
operator and therefore they're not
liable to regulatory action. In so far
as uh uh specific incidents, we will
look at how uh the the systems that are
affected, what is the solution that is
required and if it is a hardware upgrade
and it's a asset upgrade, the current
system is really uh a joint process
between the LTA and the operator. The
LTA of course is responsible for your
asset ownership in some ways asset
renewal as well and we work closely with
the operators on the ground to
prioritize some of these things and use
the monies accordingly.
For your first question which is related
to the penalties and whether or not with
respect to the earlier incident uh last
September whether the reduction in the
penalties uh would have a deterrent
effect. As you pointed out, the
penalties are fairly significant. It's
uh the penalty we have issued is uh well
above the 1 million uh threshold is
higher. We had uh given them a $3
million penalty and then we had uh after
appeal reduced that penalty to about I
think believe 2 million. Um I think it
is a fair decision that one that we have
looked at looking at again the
respective responsibilities and
culpability of the operator. They have
made a case to say there were certain
decisions that perhaps were out of their
uh out of their remit. We have looked at
their case and we have decided to reduce
the penalties accordingly and I think uh
it was a reasonable decision. the
details of the decision we can uh uh we
have already come out to talk about we
can uh give you more information if
needed. Thank you.
>> We approaching the towards the end of
question time. I'm going to ask allow
the last three PQs those who have PQS on
this. So Miss Tin, Miss Bo and Mr.
Jiming starting with Miniming.
>> Thank you Minister. I have two uh
supplementary questions. I think the
first one is that um I think so far
reports in the media as well as what
have been shared in this house seem to
suggest that there has been no observed
trends or at least systemic uh uh
factors causing the recent spate of
incidents since July. But it would
definitely seem like a really terrible
luck for all of these to happen in such
a short span of time. Now with more
lines to be added to the system uh there
will be more assets to maint to be
maintained uh more manpower more budget
that will be needed. So how will the MOT
uh MOT and PTO's work to asssure that uh
our real performance will continue to be
reliable going forward. Second is that
given what minister had shared earlier
about the example of um how one
disruption can greatly reduce the MKBF
um achieving of that. So is this still a
fair measurement of real reliability?
Thank you
>> minister.
>> I thank miss for your questions.
I took a look at the number of
disruptions for the corresponding period
last year. It was about uh 13 compared
to 15 this year. And I was trying to
figure out with the same numbers why is
it that there was uh so much attention
this year. And I my suspicion is well
not suspicion my hypothesis which I
think is uh uh probably likely is that
the impact of the individual disruptions
were far greater than the ones that
happened last year. But as Miss Tin
mentioned actually as we expand the real
network and we are in the process of
doubling our real network over 10 years
if we are able to not double the number
of train disruptions. Actually our real
reliability would have improved. That is
not to say we will not put in effort to
minimize the number of train
disruptions. We will and we will put in
our effort. We will more than double our
effort to do so. But this is
mathematics. This is reality. I think we
have to see what we can do to try our
best to improve the standards over time,
improve the quality, but this is it is
not possible for us to drive down to
zero uh disruptions. And so therefore
looking at the MKBF as I mentioned in my
speech, it is actually not very
meaningful beyond high levels of
reliability, not meaningful when you
have small numbers, singledigit uh
disruptions. What it does help is just
to give a general indicator for two
reasons. One, it helps us compare with
other systems who also use the same
indicator and two it helps us track our
performance over time and to that end as
I mentioned in my speech, LTA does track
other indicators and we will put out uh
more of these indicators so that all of
us will have a better sense of how our
real performance is. Thank you
>> Miss Pisan.
Thank you speaker and minister.
I would like to first commend our PTO's
and also LTA for keeping our MKPF to one
of the highest in the world. Um in light
of that I'd like to ask minister um
given under the the new rail financing
framework how does LTA ensure that uh
accountability is taken or rather how do
you ensure that the suppliers are held
accountable for the contractual
obligations for their train systems
availability and also their lifespan. Um
because at the end of the day the
quality of the train at the point of
procurement is is really important as
well.
>> Minister,
>> thank you M po for your question. Well,
under the new rail financing framework,
LTA is responsible for the ownership and
renewal of assets. The operators are
responsible for maintenance.
There's no perfect system. We prior to
the new real financing framework, it was
the operators that was responsible for
the asset renewal and there were similar
tensions between the regulator and the
operator on who should be doing what. I
think what is important is that both the
regulator and the operator work together
work together to make sure that we
understand the causes of problems in the
system. understand how the equipment
works, when the equipment should be
replaced or repaired and to be able to
do so openly and in a collaborative
fashion. And this is what in fact has
been we have been doing over the last uh
decade and this has in fact been I think
the main reason why the real reliability
performance has improved. We will I
think at the edges have to try to
improve the the communications and the
performance because the operators are on
the ground. They know they have some
experience. They know what they're
supposed to do and they have certain
things they are supposed to do and the
regulator or rather the purchaser in
this case LTA of the assets will also
have to work with the the vendor to make
sure that whatever it is their
responsibilities are are uh properly uh
accomplished. During the last uh uh few
disruptions I have sat in for the crisis
management meetings, the vendors were
there and in some the cases of some of
the vendors they sit in with our
operator. They have a office within the
the depo or the operation center so that
they are able to react uh more quickly.
So it's things like that that we'll
continue to do to make sure that the
vendors are are closely involved uh with
what we do. Thank you. Ming.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you the
minister for the clarifications. Uh like
to put on public record also my
appreciation to LDA, SBSD and SMRT for
the good work on the ground. Uh two
supplementary questions, Minister. One
is on the expansion of the rail system
and therefore the increasing
complexities of maintenance. How would
MOT or LTA put in the necessary
finances,
the necessary engineering time and
equally important like what uh my
colleague uh Ywani has asked the
training regimes that would be able to
maintain a increased network of
complexities to serve the public. On the
second SQ more pertaining to Jalanka,
you we know that the NAL the SPRT are
very congested systems and while we do
the good work to ratify some of the
breakdowns, the commuters do face
increased inconveniences
especially for Jalank Caillou Fernville
where the bus connectivity is somewhat
lacking. My ask you to the minister is
whether uh LTA would take proactive
action to improve the overall
connectivity especially for bus services
in Jalangayo uh Fernville so that
residents can be connected out to other
nodes and not uh regardless of different
improvements look the end. Thank you
minister
>> thank uh Mr. chief for his uh question.
Maybe I'll take the second one first
because uh I am very familiar with the
northeast line. I've taken the northeast
line since its inception in 2003. In
fact, that's the reason why I took my
first job. Um I've seen the northeast
line grow in capacity and in terms of uh
uh how it has been performing. I've
watched it closely. Um it is uh a MRT
line that we're watching very closely as
you mentioned the congestion is one of
the highest amongst our in our MRT
network and we have been looking to see
how to alleviate the the congestion as
well as really just making sure the
reliability is okay so that the impact
is not so great especially during Pars.
The ultimate solution really is to
connect the neal to more train lines and
this is what we're doing because we're
building the cross island line. I have
to try to make sure things are okay for
the next 5 years but I think when the
cross island line connects to Alang
there will be an opportunity or it will
be it will make the northeast line more
resilient because it will commuters will
be able to discharge to some other
routes on the train network. In the
meantime, we are looking at how to
augment the bus network. But buses
ultimately are not a good solution
because the capacity of one northeast
line train is 1,500 people. That is 15
to 20 buses end to end just for one
train. And let's not forgetting that
each train runs at one and well 2 minute
intervals currently at the northeast
line. So buses will never be a complete
substitute but at the margins if it can
help we will try to see how we can
augment the bus capacity along the
northeast line corridor.
As for how to support the workers in
terms of uh training regimes finance and
uh really getting them up to speed on uh
uh the new sort of systems that
available as I mentioned earlier in my
reply to uh missio the we have to work
very closely with the unions and the
operators.
uh I have visited the workers themselves
they not only do the work on the
day-to-day basis also go for quite a bit
of training and I think whenever they uh
engage in new systems actually they're
quite exh quite excited hydraulic
systems uh even things like uh condition
monitoring these are new things that we
have been investing in in terms of
technology and
in the world public transport systems
don't tend to be uh highly
uh highly advanced because in the world
most public transport systems don't get
a lot of investment and money in
Singapore we have invested a lot of
money the operators are doing a lot of
things in terms of maintenance on
condition monitoring which they showcase
to other systems and other cities at at
international rail conferences so we are
doing what we can and I think there is
no shortage of investment on that front
and we will be happy to work with the
unions to see whether or not. There are
other things that we can do to support
our workers in upgrading themselves.
Thank you.
Order. End of question time.
Introduction of government bills.
Acting Minister for Transport.
Speaker, on behalf of the acting
minister for transport, I signify that
the president's recommendation for the
introduction of this bill has been
obtained and I introduce a bill
institute an act to amend the civil
aviation authority of Singapore act 209
to establish the sustainable aviation
fuel fund to provide for the imposition
of a sustainable aviation fuel levy and
for related purposes and to make
miscellaneous amendments.
The Civil Aviation Authority of
Singapore Amendment Bill.
>> Second reading. What
>> at the next available sitting?
>> So be it.
Minister for
so coordinating coordinating minister
for social policies and minister for
health.
>> She's not here.
>> Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the
coordinating minister for social
policies and minister for health, I
introduce a bill institute an act to
make miscellaneous amendments to certain
acts.
The statutes miscellaneous amendments
bill
>> second reading. What day?
>> At the next available sitting.
>> So be it.
>> Thank you.
>> Coordinating uh sorry coordinating
minister for social policies and
minister for health. Again
>> Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the
coordinating Minister for Social
Policies and Minister for Health, I
introduce a bill institute an act to
amend the Cashew Life and Long-Term Care
Act 2019.
>> The Cashew Life and Long-Term Care
Amendment Bill.
>> Second reading. What day?
>> At the next available sitting, sir.
>> So be it.
Order. Leader of the house.
Mr. Speaker, I move that notwithstanding
the standing orders, my ministerial
statement on duties and privileges of
the leader of the opposition be taken
now and before the business motion on
speech time standing in my name and that
the following ministerial statements,
namely the ministerial statement on
situation in the Middle East standing in
the name of the minister foreign
affairs, the ministerial statement on
situation in the Middle East, to be
delivered by the senior minister of
state foreign affairs on behalf of the
minister for foreign affairs and the
ministerial statement on Singaporean's
response to the situation in the Middle
East standing in the name of the acting
minister in charge of Muslim affairs be
taken in that order after the business
motion on speech time standing in my
name and before the motion for the
address of thanks for the benefit of new
members
Under the standing orders, the debate on
the address of thanks ordinarily takes
precedence over ministerial statements
and business motions should be disposed
of before the debate of the address of
thanks takes place. I'm moving this
business motion for two reasons. First,
my ministerial statement on duties and
privileges of the leader of the
opposition sets out the leader of the
opposition's duties and privileges for
this term of parliament. It would thus
be opposite for my ministerial statement
to be taken before the rest of the
proceedings at this sitting including
the debate on the address of thanks. I
will I'm also moving that my ministerial
statement be taken before the business
motion on speech time standing in my
name as the two are closely related.
Second, the two ministerial statements
on situation in the Middle East and the
ministerial statement on Singaporean's
response to situation in the Middle East
are of current public interest. Also,
Minister Vivian is due to deliver
Singapore's statement at the 80th UN
General Assembly uh and leaves for that
tonight. And it would be good for
Singaporeans to hear the government's
position on this before he leaves. It
would thus be best for these ministerial
statements to be taken before the debate
on the address of thanks and members
will have sufficient time to seek
clarification on these ministerial
statements.
>> The question is as moved by the leader
of the house. Those who agree say I.
>> I.
>> Those who disagree say no.
I think the eyes have it. The eyes have
ministerial statements leader of the
house.
Mr. Speaker, following the general
election held on 3rd May 2025, Prime
Minister Lawrence Wong had announced
that Mr. Pritam Singh would continue to
be the leader of the opposition in the
15th parliament of Singapore and that he
would be given staff and resources to
perform his duties. This was reported in
the media. As the position of the leader
of the opposition is not dealt with in
our constitution or in the standing
orders of parliament, I should for good
order state the duties and privileges of
the leader of the opposition for the
parliamentary record. Mr. ing's duties
and privileges as the leader of the
opposition in this 15th parliament will
remain the same as those in the 14th
parliament. Those were set out in my
ministerial statement of 31st August
2020 when the office of the leader of
the opposition was officially recognized
and implemented. They can be summarized
as follows. First on the lead lead
leader of the opposition's parliamentary
privileges. The leader of the opposition
will take the seat directly across the
prime minister in this chamber during
parliamentary proceedings. This is the
same practice as that in other countries
which formally recognize the role of the
leader of the opposition and was also
observed by us in previous terms of
parliament in Singapore in respect of
the leader of the main opposition party.
The leader of the opposition will
generally be given the right of first
response among members of parliament to
ask the lead question of ministers on
policies, bills, and motions in
parliament. This will be at the
speaker's discretion and subject to
existing speaking conventions.
The leader of the opposition will have a
longer speech time for debates than
other backbenches, 40 minutes as opposed
to the usual 20. And I will be moving a
motion to this effect later. The leader
of the opposition will also be allocated
an office in parliament and staff
support and resources and his
parliamentary allowance will be double
that of other MPs. I have consulted the
speaker on these arrangements and he has
and he has agreed that they remain
appropriate. I have also apprised Mr.
Singh of this. Next, I touch on the
leader of the opposition's parliamentary
duties. The 15th Parliament of Singapore
is our largest parliament to date with
99 elected members. There are 12
opposition members of whom two are
non-constituency members of parliament.
As the leader of the opposition, Mr.
Singh will lead and organize the
opposition's parliamentary business in
our largest parliament to date. This
includes leading the opposition in
presenting alternative views in
parliamentary debates on policies,
bills, and motions, scrutinizing the
government's positions and actions in
parliament,
and nominating opposition members for
appointment to the standing select
committees and other select committees
of parliament. Finally, the leader of
the opposition may be called upon to
assume other duties such as attending
official state functions and taking part
in visits and meetings alongside members
of the government and the public
service. And from time to time, the
leader of the opposition may receive
confidential briefings by the government
on matters to be determined by the
government. These briefings will promote
better understanding across both sides
of the house on important national
issues such as security and external
relations, especially in the event of
national crisis or emergency.
I congratulate Mr. Singh on his
continuation as the leader of the
opposition. I look forward to working
with him on this parliament's mission to
serve Singaporeans and build a stronger
Singapore.
Are there any clarifications from
members?
As speaker, I would also like to take
this occasion to formally welcome Mr.
Pritam Singh as leader of the opposition
in this 15 parliament of Singapore. The
position of the leader of the opposition
and the duties and privileges accorded
to the position was first given formal
recognition in the 14th parliament. The
arrangements have worked out well and
parliament three proceedings have gone
on smoothly.
Such arrangements will continue in this
15 parliament. Second time the position
is formally recognized. Mr. Pritam Singh
continuing to lead and to organize the
opposition's parliamentary business.
The role of the leader of the opposition
could continue to evolve in future. The
positions duties and priv privileges may
then be correspondingly updated where
necessary to best meet Singapore's
parliamentary context. Bearing in mind
the objective of having the opposition
scrutinize the government's positions
and actions in parliament and presenting
alternative views and polic proposals
for debate.
Having worked with both the leader of
the house and the leader of the
opposition in the 14th parliament, I ask
for their support and continued
cooperation across the aisle which will
ensure that all members regardless of
party uphold the house decorum, dignity
and honor at all times. I look forward
to working with them once again to
conduct parliamentary business and
debates in an orderly, efficient and
constructive manner in this 15
parliament of Singapore.
Order business motion on
sorry.
Oh, okay. I should put the motion uh to
members. Um can I as many of our as many
as there are of the opinion as many of
our who agree say I
>> to the contrary say no think the eyes
have it and the motion is carried
business motion on speech time for the
leader of the opposition
leader
>> Mr. Speaker, I move that notwithstanding
standing order 488 with effect from this
day's sitting until the end of the 15th
parliament, the leader of the
opposition, Mr. Pritam Singh shall be
entitled to speak for up to 40 minutes
on any question in parliament. This is
to allow Mr. Pritam Singh as the leader
of the opposition for the 15th
parliament the privilege of a longer
speaking duration for speeches as
mentioned in my ministerial statement
earlier.
The question is as moved by the leader
of the house.
Those who agree say I.
>> Those who disagree say no. I think the I
have it. The I have it. Ministerial
statement by Minister for Foreign
Affairs.
Mr. Speaker, sir, I wish to make a
ministerial statement on the situation
in the Middle East. Senior Minister of
State Miss Sim an will and the acting
minister in charge of uh Muslim affairs
associate professor Mohammed Fisizel
will subsequently deliver their
ministerial statements addressing
related issues.
Let me start by sketching the
international context.
The Israeli conduct of the war in Gaza
and the other actions they have taken in
the West Bank have sparked renewed
efforts by the international community
to press Israel to change course.
Recently, Singapore and a large majority
of the member states at the United
Nations General Assembly voted in favor
of a resolution endorsing the New York
declaration to support the two-state
solution. This resolution reflected
widespread concern that the two-state
solution is being eroded by Israel's
actions.
Around 10 countries
may announce recognition of Palestine
later today at the UN. For some of them,
the recognition will be conditional,
predicated on the Palestinian
Authorities's commitment to renounce
terrorism and to conduct administrative
reform. They also expect perhaps
wishfully for Hamas to disarm and to
release all the hostages.
I will now lay out Singapore's position
on the recognition of Palestinian
statethood. But allow me to start by
setting out Singapore's national
interest.
Singapore is a multi-racial,
multi-religious city state in the heart
of Southeast Asia. Given our
circumstances, that means we have three
priorities. The first is maintaining
national unity. The long-standing
complicated tragedy of the Israeli
Palestinian conflict elicits strong and
diverse reactions amongst Singaporeans.
This is completely understandable.
But we must express these different
perspectives respectfully. We cannot
allow external events or actors to cause
fissures in our society.
National policies and especially foreign
policy positions must be based on
Singapore's national interests and not
on communal or religious perspectives.
And we must never allow outsiders
to exploit potential domestic fissures
within our own society.
The second priority is protecting
Singapore's security. We must never be
complacent about the threat of terrorism
and military conflict. As a small and
open nation, we cannot condone terrorism
in any form. We must never accept any
excuse or any justification for the
wanton killing of innocent civilians and
the taking of hostages.
Actually, whenever a terrorist incident
occurs overseas, the questions that go
through my mind are the following.
What if this happens in Singapore?
How would Singapore respond?
What actions would our military and
security agencies
have to undertake? And what would our
diplomats have to say the next day at
the United Nations?
This is why we supported Israel's right
of self-defense after the 7th of October
terrorist attacks.
Because if anything similar were to ever
happen in Singapore, have no doubt we
would assert the same right of
self-defense.
We also for the sake of our security
need to maintain cooperation with
international partners. This is to
enhance our defense and our security
capabilities and to keep Singapore safe.
We all know that Israel helped us to
build up the Singapore Armed Forces in
our earliest years of independence where
we are most vulnerable.
This unique security relationship
remains invaluable to us.
But this does not stop us from conveying
our views directly to the Israeli
government clearly and constructively
when we do not agree with their actions
and we have done so and we will continue
to do so.
The third priority is to promote respect
for and compliance with international
law. Singapore relies on clear rules and
norms to safeguard our sovereignty as a
tiny city state. A world that is based
on might is right is fundamentally
enimical to small states like us. So it
means Singapore must abide by and uphold
international law consistently.
These three priorities surrounding our
national interest have shaped our
approach to the conflict in Gaza. On the
7th of October 2023 itself, Singapore
immediately condemned the terrorist
attack on Israel by Hamas and we
recognize Israel's right of self-defense
in accordance with international law and
the UN charter. We have always and
repeatedly called for the immediate and
unconditional release of all hostages.
But in exercising its right to defend
itself,
Israel must comply with international
humanitarian law. And that includes the
principle of proportionality in warfare.
And our view is that Israel's actions in
Gaza have gone too far for too long. And
Israel's military operations, which have
recently intensified in Gaza City, have
exacerbated the prolonged, desperate
suffering of innocent civilians.
This is unconscionable.
The scale of civilian death is
harrowing.
More than 60,000 people have been
reportedly killed, a third of them
children.
Singapore condemns the killing of
innocent civilians.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is
shocking. An estimated 90% of homes have
been destroyed or damaged.
Schools, hospitals, places of worship
have been struck. Around 1.9 million,
90% of Gazans have been internally
displaced. Medical services are
incapacitated and overwhelmed. Gaza is
dangerously close to famine levels, and
this was entirely preventable.
We have all seen the heart-wrenching
pictures of gazens, including young
children, scavenging for food. The
deliberate and unlawful denial of
humanitarian aid to a civilian
population is completely unacceptable.
In our view, these excessive actions by
the Israeli government may even be a
breach of international humanitarian
law. The United Nations Independent
International Commission of Inquiry
recently concluded that Israel is
committing genocide in Gaza. This matter
is currently before the International
Court of Justice, which is the
appropriate forum to adjudicate such
grave concerns.
In recent weeks, more aid, including
from Singapore, has entered Gaza. But
this is still woefully inadequate.
much more humanitarian supplies are
urgently needed and Israel has a
responsibility to facilitate this. It
must lift all restrictions on its
delivery and to allow the full and
unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid. And
Palestinians must be enabled to access
this aid safely and with dignity.
Singapore will continue to do what we
can to contribute to international
efforts to alleviate civilian suffering
in Gaza.
So far, the government and Singaporeans
have contributed 10 tranches of
humanitarian aid. This includes the
latest contribution by the Singapore Red
Cross of about 1.2 2 million Singapore
dollars through the Egyptian Red
Crescent, which was just announced
during President Tamman Shamaratnam's
state visit to Egypt. Last month, the
SAF air dropped urgent humanitarian aid
to the Palestinians. In fact, this was
the second airdrop operation conducted
by the SCF and we are grateful to our
SCF service men and women for stepping
up to do this to express our compassion.
Singapore will do more and under our
10th tranch, we will support the
following. First, Egyptian hospitals in
treating injured Palestinians. In fact,
right now, a team of Singaporean doctors
and clinicians are currently in Cairo to
support the NASA Institute in case
consultations for the more complicated
cases. The SCF has deployed two leazison
offices based in Cairo to coordinate
Singapore's assistance in TEATA. We are
working to deploy another medical team
to Egypt to help treat even more
patients from Gaza when the conditions
are conducive.
Second, Jordan's restoring hope
initiative for Gaza. We will provide
prosthetics supplies for about a 100
Palestinian amputes who are being
treated in Jordan and in Jordanian field
hospitals in Gaza. Third, the World Food
Program's efforts to fight hunger in
Gaza, we will contribute 500,000 US.
All these efforts will bring our total
humanitarian assistance for Gaza to more
than 24 million Singapore dollars and
Singapore will continue to support
international efforts in the day after
scenarios including through the Arab
reconstruction plan. It's too early for
specifics, but we will contribute
financially and in kind. But there needs
first to be a permanent ceasefire, and
the hostages must be released
unconditionally.
Only then can physical reconstruction
and healing begin.
On the issue of peacekeeping, which Mr.
The Sakyandi Supupad has asked about
whilst the idea of a UN stabilization
mission in Gaza is being discussed
informally, there is currently no formal
proposal for a UN peacekeeping force in
Gaza at the UN Security Council.
Singapore will study any security
council resolution on this issue
carefully and we will assess how we can
support its implementation if it comes
to pass in future.
Let me now turn to the issue of
recognition.
Singapore has made our position clear.
In fact, we had changed our position in
May last year. Let me state our position
as of today. We will recognize the state
of Palestine when it has an effective
government that accepts Israel's right
to exist and categorically renounces
terrorism.
Allow me
to take you through a brief review of
history to put this position in context.
The two-state solution arose in 1947
when the UN General Assembly recommended
the partition of the British mandate of
Palestine into a separate Arab and
Jewish states. Jerusalem under this same
resolution was supposed to be a separate
internationally administered entity.
Unfortunately, the decades since then
have been littered with missed
opportunities by both sides. For
instance,
the two-state formulation was accepted
by the Jewish leadership in 1947, but
rejected by the Arabs.
The Jewish leadership took what was on
the table, declared independence,
war broke out in 1948.
In fact, it is only in November 1988
did the Palestinian Liberation
Organization implicitly accept Israel's
right to exist. This is back in 1988.
and they proclaimed the state of Israel
and Singapore welcomed this proclamation
is because we viewed it as significant
progress towards a two-state solution.
Unfortunately,
notwithstanding the Oslo Accords in 1993
and 1995, none of the subsequent
attempts to reach a final status
agreement succeeded.
In 2006,
Hamas won the Palestinian Legislative
Council elections and its leader, Ismile
Haneier, formed the government on the
basis of a majority.
But this was largely rejected by the
international community given Hamas's
refusal to recognize Israel's right to
exist, its rejection of peaceful
coexistence, and its propagation of
terrorism.
In June 2007,
Hamas violently seized Gaza from the
Fata dominated Palestinian Authority and
has ruled in Gaza by force ever since
then. And there have been no elections
in the occupied Palestinian territories
for two decades.
So two points are evident. First, whilst
the Palestinian Authority administers
the occupied Palestinian territories in
the West Bank,
it does not de facto control Gaza. Gaza
is ruled by Hamas.
For the last 18 years at least, there
has not been a unified Palestinian
government that exercises effective
control in Palestinian territories,
including the West Bank and Gaza.
What will happen in Gaza after the
ceasefire remains unclear.
Second point, Hamas has consistently
rejected Israel's right to exist. It has
yet to renounce terrorism or agree to
disarm. In fact, Hamas has vowed to
repeat the terrorist attacks of 7th
October if given the opportunity again.
On the other hand, Singapore enjoys good
relations with the Palestinian
Authority.
We welcome its commitment to renounce
terrorism, to carry out reforms, and to
disarm Hamas, as President Mahmud Abbas
stated in his letter to French President
Emanuel Macron in June this year.
However, it remains to be seen whether
the Palestinian Authority can really
disarm and displace Hamas from Gaza.
You can hope,
but hope on its own is not a reality.
So, we will closely monitor the
fulfillment of these commitments made by
the Palestinian Authority.
Ultimately, to res resolve this
long-standing conflict in a
comprehensive, just and durable manner,
there needs to be a negotiated
settlement which results in two states,
one Israeli, one Palestinian, with their
peoples living aside alongside each
other in peace, security, and dignity.
It seems like an impossible dream.
And as difficult and distant as it may
now seem,
nevertheless, we believe this is still
the only viable pathway to a lasting
peace. And so Singapore will continue to
support any initiative
to resume negotiations between the
parties involved towards this ultimate
goal. Actually, our position
should not come as a surprise to people
within this house and to our citizens
outside parliament.
Singapore has consistently affirm the
right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and their own state
and our voting record and the UN
consistently reflects this. Last year,
we voted in favor of several resolutions
which expressed support for the
admission of Palestine as a UN member
and affirm the Palestinians right to
self-determination. We have also
supported Palestinians right to be quote
a non-member observer state unquote in
various international organizations
including the International Labor
Organization and the Universal Postal
Union just to site some examples.
So what are the prospects
for a two-state?
Regrettably,
extremist elements on both sides
continue to actively undermine the
prospects for a two-state solution.
Hamas has consistently said no.
At the same time, there are Israeli
settlers who continue to displace
Palestinians in the West Bank.
And some Israeli politicians have spoken
explicitly about annexing parts of the
West Bank or Gaza. And recently, the
Israeli government signed an agreement
to proceed with the so-called E1
settlement project in the West Bank.
This will fragment the West Bank and
threaten the contigu contiguity of Arab
towns in the occupied Palestinian
territories even further.
So, let me be clear. Singapore has
consistently held that Israeli
settlements are illegal under
international law. We have voted in
support of UN resolutions that reject
Israeli settlement activities. And we
call and have called on Israel to resin
all unilateral measures seeking to
change the status of Jerusalem.
We call on the Israeli government to
cease settlement construction and
expansion. We oppose ongoing attempts to
create new facts on the ground which
undermine the prospects for a two-state
solution.
Consequently,
Singapore will impose targeted sanctions
on the leaders of radical right-wing
settler groups or organizations that
have been responsible for acts of
violence against Palestinians in the
West Bank. Details will be announced at
a later date, but this is a significant
change.
Mr. Speaker, Singapore's approach to
foreign policy is grounded on objective
realities.
In the case of Palestine,
this is what we meant when we said that
there is a need for an effective
Palestinian government that accepts
Israel's right to exist and
categorically renounces terrorism.
This has also been the prevailing view
amongst many countries that see
recognition as a meaningful step towards
the ultimate goal of a negotiated
two-state solution.
But
in the yesterday and today, a few
countries have chosen to change their
position and to formally recognize the
Palestinian state now, even as the
prospects of a functioning state have in
fact become more remote. They do so
precisely to express their grave concern
at the status quo, and they hope that
this will make it harder for Israel to
extinguish a two-state solution
altogether.
Singapore so far has maintained our
position that whilst doing as much as we
can to help the Palestinian Authority
strengthen their capabilities for future
statethood, Singapore's support for a
two-state solution means we will oppose
any steps by Israel to extinguish or
undermine such a solution. Singapore
cannot recognize any unilateral
annexation of occupied territory because
this would be a flagrant breach of
international law. We will continue
tracking developments closely. Events
are unfolding quickly and remain
unpredictable.
If the situation continues to
deteriorate
or if Israel takes further steps to to
extinguish a two-state solution, we will
reconsider our position on recognizing a
Palestinian state.
In the meantime, Singapore will step up
concrete, constructive support for the
Palestinians in preparation for their
eventual statehood. We will continue to
support the Palestinian Authorities's
capacity building efforts. Our $10
million enhanced technical assistance
package has already benefited more than
800 Palestinian officials. We will offer
more scholarships for Palestinian
students as well as community policing
and leadership programs. We established
a representative office in Ramala in
2022 which has been a focal point for
our capacity building efforts.
We have to continue engaging both the
Palestinian Authority and Israel.
I know there have been calls to cut
diplomatic ties, but doing so would
diminish our ability to communicate with
Israel and frankly serve no practical
purpose. Diplomacy is not just about
engaging when there's agreement. It is
arguably even more important when there
is disagreement.
And I recently had candid open
discussions with both my Israeli and
Palestinian counterparts. I made it
clear to Israeli Foreign Minister Gideon
Sah that we see the deliberate and
unlawful denial of humanitarian aid to
civilians as a breach of international
humanitarian law. I told him that
Israel's military response had gone on
too far for too long. The scope and the
casualties were beyond what could be
justified.
I added that Israel's actions were
enimical to its own long-term strategic
and security interests.
Our links to both sides are useful, not
just to get our point across, but also
in a very real way to facilitate our
humanitarian assistance for
Palestinians, especially in Gaza. And we
have worked both with our Arab regional
partners on this as well with the
Israelis whose concurrence is essential
for these efforts on the ground. Miss
Helina Abdul Haleim has asked about our
efforts to ensure that Israel abides by
international law. When principles are
breached, we speak our mind clearly. We
will continue to call out actions by all
and any side, including by the Israelis
or Hamas
that breach international law. Earlier
this month,
we had to call out Israel's air strikes
on Doha as a blatant violation of
Qatar's sovereignty. We have also said
that the deliberate and unlawful denial
of humanitarian aid to civilians
and people reportedly being shot while
desperately trying to access food in our
view is a violation of international
humanitarian law.
So let me conclude
by acknowledging
a hard truth
which I hope both sides will grasp in
the spirit in which Singapore makes this
point.
Territorial and political compromise
is essential if this conflict is ever to
be resolved.
The Israeli people
and the Palestinian people
both exist as an objective reality.
Both have claims to a sovereign state in
their ancestral homeland.
There can be no quote river to the sea
unquote
for either side.
Because if you really tried to effect
that
some terrible consequences
follow from that logically.
But as a friend to the people on both
sides, we only hope that in time there
will be political will.
There will be inspired leadership on
both sides
to enter into direct negotiations on the
two-state solution consistent with
relevant UN Security Council
resolutions.
And Mr. Speaker, with your permission,
may I ask that I can respond to
clarifications from members after uh SMS
and acting minister FAL have made their
respective ministerial statements and
then we can take all clarifications
collectively. Thank you.
The senior minister of state for foreign
affairs and the acting minister in
charge of Muslim affairs will be making
related ministerial statements.
I will allow members to raise points of
clarification on all three statements
after the end of the third statement.
Senior Minister of State, same end.
>> Mr. Speaker, may I have your permission
to deliver the statement on behalf of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs?
>> Go ahead.
>> Mr. speaker in Mandarin.
foreignch.
Fore!
Foreign! Foreign!
Fore
runner.
forchech.
Fore!
Foreign! Foreign!
forchech.
Fore! Foreign! Foreign!
Fore!
Fore!chch!
The art
Fore
woman.
speech.
D E
foreignch.
Fore!
Foreign! Foreign!
forchech.
forch.
Fore! Foreign! Foreign!
Acting Minister in Charge of Muslim
Affairs, Associate Professor
Mr. Speaker,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs has
reminded this House of Singapore's
long-standing position that the
Palestinian people have a right to their
own homeland and to selfdetermination.
This has been our consistent stance for
decades.
We have also for many years insisted
that only a negotiated two-state
solution can deliver a comprehensive,
just and durable solution to the Israeli
Palestinian conflict.
For many of us in the Malay Muslim
community,
this conflict is felt especially deeply
because the Palestinian cause is one
that holds profound meaning to us.
But I believe I speak on behalf of all
Singaporeans,
not just the Malay Muslims, that we are
horrified and saddened by the latest
developments in the Middle East.
What is happening in Gaza is a terrible
humanitarian tragedy.
The suffering, forced displacement, and
loss of innocent civilians we are
witnessing is unbearable to many of us
regardless of our ideologies of faith.
This house first discussed this matter
on 6th November 2023
when we strongly condemn the terrorist
attacks by Hamas and called for the
immediate and unconditional release of
all civilian hostages.
What Hamas did on 7th October was an act
of terrorism
that involved indiscriminate killing and
extreme brutality.
Now almost two years on, the situation
has evolved greatly and Israel's actions
in Gaza have been disproportionate
and unacceptable.
The intensifying bombardment of Gaza is
horrifying.
It has destroyed Gaza's critical
infrastructure,
buildings, and homes, forcing almost the
entire civilian population of Gaza city
to flee,
but nowhere safe to go.
Then there is the widespread starvation
and deprivation as the UN has declared a
man-made famine.
To compound the tragedy, humanitarian
aid has been blocked for months by
Israel.
The Palestinians, including women and
children, have to risk their lives in an
active war zone just to get food.
More than 1,000 have already been killed
in violent, chaotic food distributions.
The continued force displacement of
Palestinians is morally reprehensible,
an offense against humanity.
1.9 million Palestinians have had to
flee their homes since the war began.
and since the ceasefire in March, more
than 750,000.
Yet, the Israeli government has chosen
to compound this tragedy by moving ahead
with settlement projects in the West
Bank.
These are illegal under international
law.
By any yard stick, the actions by Israel
are unjustifiable
and may even be a breach of
international humanitarian law.
They are certainly against morality.
Israel has a right to defend itself, but
as PM said back in May,
it has now gone too far.
Along with the wider international
community, we must express our firm
opposition to violation of international
law and to unilateral measures that seek
to permanently erase the possibility of
a two-state solution.
Earlier this month, Singapore endorsed
the New York declaration at the UN
General Assembly, once again standing
firm in support of steps towards the
two-state solution.
But for a two-state solution to be
viable,
Israel must accept a Palestinian state,
just as Palestinians
must also accept Israel's right to
exist.
Mr. Speaker, allow me to continue my
statement in Malayan
Speaker.
Singapore
Singapore. for
Palestine. Singapore.
practical.
Islam.
Humanity
matters.
RLF
relief
Thank
[Music]
National
Mr. Speaker, I continue my speech in
English.
Mr. Speaker, like many Singaporeans,
I too feel strongly about the
disproportionate and devastating
destruction of homes and innocent lives
in Gaza.
But our Malay Muslim community has shown
me that flashes of indignation and
outrage can be channeled into compassion
and wisdom.
They have governized support for
humanitarian assistance for the
Palestinian civilians in Gaza.
Many started nearly two years ago when
the conflict first erupted and the
community's efforts are still going
strong today.
This is not an isolated effort as many
Singaporeans from other communities have
stepped up to. For example, I was glad
to see both Muslims and non-Muslims
contribute to the aid for Gaza organized
by Rahmatan Alamin in collaboration with
the MCube at towns which has raised more
than $2.4 million for Gaza.
Since the start of the conflict, RLAF
has raised a total of 15 million for
Gaza.
Recently, I met the CEO of the Egyptian
Red Crescent when RLAF presented a $1
million check as part of our donation.
She commented that Singapore always
delivered what we promised.
I invite Singaporeans to continue to
rally together,
speak with our actions,
and do what we can to elevate the
sufferings of the Palestinian people.
After all, if we were in their place, we
would hope others would extend the same
practical and tangible support.
Let us continue to be guided by wisdom
and compassion.
Be advocates and examplers of peace both
where the conflict is happening and here
at home with our fellow Singaporeans,
brothers and sisters.
As the Malay saying goes,
which loosely means united we stand,
divided we fall.
Let this be our compass when discussing
and responding to the situation in Gaza
that whatever views
we have or we hold to, we will always
respond
constructively and responsibly and
remain united and stand together as one
Singapore even as we extend the much
neededed support to those in need. miles
away. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
[Music]
>> Order. We will now have clarifications
on the statements. Yes, I can see many
hands uh of members wanting to speak and
seek clarifications. I have on record
about 16 members who have fought PQs on
this subject. I will give priority to
these 16 members. But first, I'd like to
take this opportunity to remind members
that pursuant to standing order 23,
members may seek clarification on the
ministerial statements, but no debate
should be allowed there on
members can seek clarifications by way
of asking questions. So, I seek members
understanding to keep your
clarifications clear and concise. And
likewise, I ask the ministers to also
keep your answers clear and concise.
Mr. Vikramna,
>> thank you. Uh, Minister, thank you for
your clarification on Singapore's
position on recognition of Palestine. I
have um I think some of the re one of
the reasons the other countries have
changed their position is they believe
some of the actions Israel may be taking
now will make it much more difficult to
have the two-state solution including
the current Israeli government's
statement that it will not recognize a
state of Israel as well as expanding
settlements in the West Bank. So what
these other governments believe is
recognizing the state of Palestine now
will help to preserve the hope of that
two-state solution. Is this something
that Singapore would consider as well if
it feels the actions of the Israeli
government may be undermining the
two-state solution
>> Minister Vipit
Mr. Speaker actually
I mean this is a view which I think
other members in this house will also
share
actually all of us on the same side.
When I say all of us I also include the
other countries who have shifted their
position. Let me let me say why I
believe
we all want peace.
We all want an immediate release of all
the hostages.
We all believe that a two-state
solution, as difficult and remote as it
is, is the only viable way out of this
quagmire.
Where we defer
actually is that every country has its
own national circumstances,
its own domestic constituencies,
its own outlook
and its on its leverage or lack thereof
on the key players in the Middle East.
In the case of Singapore, I said just
now
we pursue foreign policy in a realist
mode and we do pay attention to
objective reality.
And the first problem which I tried to
outline just now is who is in charge
in Palestine.
Are you dealing with Hamas, dealing with
Palestinian Authority or something in
Kuwait yet to emerge? So that's first
point, objective reality.
The second point is our zero tolerance
for terrorism
because of our own circumstances.
So for instance, I cannot fathom or
imagine trying to have diplomatic
ties with an entity that is still
holding hostages
that promises that it will repeat what
it has done on the 7th of October and
does not recognize the others right to
exist.
So that's why our position today is is
not if
but when to recognize and we are waiting
for that appropriate
constellation
of factors to be in appropriate in our
view appropriate configuration
but having said that you've also raised
the point and many others have as that
the Israeli government, the current
Israeli government is actually making
things worse.
The settlement expansion,
even the explicit remarks, so both in
terms of what they say and what they do,
that it is clear that the extremist
elements within the Israeli body politic
actually are trying to extinguish
prospects for two-state solution.
And surely we cannot give them cover for
that.
And that's why today what you've seen is
these two announcements, right? Not if,
but when. And we spelt out the factors
of when we will recognize.
And the other is targeted sanctions to
reflect our opposition
to this violent
extremist
attempts to to extinguish the two-state
solution. And I've also added the caveat
situation is evolving very rapidly. It's
unpredictable and we will have to
monitor if the situation continues to
deteriorate or if Israel takes further
steps to make it well impossible, we
will have to recomputee.
So the point is to focus actually on the
similarities that actually we're all on
the same side, right? But we will each
country will have a different trigger,
different threshold and a different
appreciation of the situation.
Mr. Pam Singh.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Uh the workers
party's position on the formal
recognition of the state of Palestine uh
is clear in our manifesto the same
manifesto we took two voters uh before
the elections that uh has not changed.
Uh I note the earlier remarks by
minister uh going through what had
happened in the past. Um 37 years ago
Singapore formally welcomed the
establishment of the announcement or the
proclamation of a state of Palestine. uh
and an important trigger for that was
the uh explicit recognition by
Yasaharafhat
that the PLO would reject terrorism.
Similarly at the New York with regard to
the New York declaration
uh the Ministry of Foreign Affairs also
welcomed the Palestinian Authorities
re continued rejection of violence and
terrorism. Uh, with that as a preamble,
does the minister not agree that the
prospects of having an effective
Palestinian government in place, which
is a precondition to Singapore
recognizing the state of Palestine, is
not a realistic precondition anymore,
given the statement of the Israeli prime
minister that there will not be a
Palestinian state and one can assume
that he will work overtime to make sure
that does not happen.
and that is separate to the signing of
an expanded settlement agreement that
would bisect the occupied West Bank.
Secondly,
does the minister not agree that with
many of our major trade and defense
partners like France, Australia, UK and
our ASEAN neighbors and the overwhelming
majority of the international community
of nations recognizing the state of
Palestine? Does our foreign policy
position not risk being seen as
anacronistic?
And in this regard, what specific
principles are we upholding by not
recognizing the state of Palestine forth
with? Shouldn't recognizing the state of
Palestine be in our national interests
and more weight placed instead of on
Israel's flagrant violations of
international law and commitment to
continue doing the same.
Would not doing so send a clear message
that as a matter of clear principle,
Singapore's foreign policy stands for
the foundational role of the UN in
maintaining peace and security and does
not stand for breaches of international
law, particularly in view of the
government's public comments on UNC
resolution 242 and separately 2334.
The third question pertains to the
government and uh the government and the
SCF's extensive militarytoilitary links
with the state of Israel. Most recent
example of this being the joint
development of a surfaceto-surface
missile blue spear by Singapore
Technologies and the Israel Aerospace
Industries.
Has the government and this was uh a
part of my parliamentary question. Has
the government reviewed whether close
ties with Israel, particularly in the
military domain, going forward,
continue to be in our national
interests? And has the government
assessed whether Singapore is relatively
overinvested in the Israel Singapore
relationship? And is it not time to
diversify in our national interests? Uh
minister spoke of sanctions uh and
announced that this more details would
be announced later. Uh, do the sanctions
that the minister is foreseeing have any
impact on current military-to-ilitary
relationship with Israel? My last
question is to the senior minister of
state for uh, home affairs. Uh what is
the current threat assessment to
Singapore and Singapore interest arising
from a perception of close Singapore
Israel ties from radicalized individuals
abroad and self-radicalized individuals
locally? And does the does the
government see a direct link between
threats to Singapore
and close given close Singapore Israel
ties in the immediate to medium term?
Thank you for your indulgence, Mr.
Speaker.
Minister of blood Krishna.
First question is our
requirement
that there be an effective
political entity
or government on the other side. A
realistic one.
And the leader of opposition adds on to
say, well,
Israel will do its best to make sure
that there's no realistic
government and therefore by insisting on
having an effective
government as an objective reality, are
we setting the bar too high? Well, Mr.
Speaker, that's why I took some pains in
my statement
to go through the history of the
Palestinian Authority
and
the very difficult journey
to get both sides to accept a two-state
solution. I reminded you the two-state
solution
didn't begin
yesterday.
In fact, it goes back to the UN in 1947.
Israel took what was on offer,
gran declared independence.
The entire
constellation of Arab countries said no
will be one state.
You had war.
And it is only in 1988
that the Palestinian Liberation
Organization in its proclamation
of a Palestinian state
even then only implicitly recognize
Israel's right to exist and renounce
terrorism.
And we welcome that proclamation because
these two elements recognizing the other
exists and renouncing terrorism is
important for our national interest.
It's not just a foreign policy issue.
It's in our national interest. I also
then went on to describe the events,
Oslo,
the elections in Gaza,
the two decades without election, the
violence between Hamas and Fata. Again
to point out the lack of an objective
reality
is not all on due to one other party.
They've got to get their own house in
order.
Will we allow however
Israel therefore to have a veto?
And the answer is we cannot allow them
to have a veto because our consistent
longheld belief is a two-state
solution. And if either one or both says
no, well, we can't go along with them on
that right. And that's why I have also
caveed that our position is not if but
when. And we have also highlighted that
if the situation continues to
deteriorate or if Israel takes further
action to extinguish any prospect for
two-state solution, then we have to
reconsider our position.
And then you asked whether we are being
anacronistic because
several basically European powers in the
last few days have changed position
and in my answer to Mr. Naya I tried to
remind everyone that actually on the big
picture we all want the same thing but
that different countries will have
different thresholds
different triggers to decide when they
take certain diplomatic
mo moves.
We for now
have shifted since May last year when we
said we are prepared in principle to
recognize the Palestinian state. Today
I'm telling you we will recognize the
Palestinian state when effective
government renouncing terrorism
recognizing the state of Israel. It is a
shift but it is also a shift which I
want to emphasize recognizes it puts
some
you know you have to clear a certain bar
that amongst the Palestinians themselves
they have sorted out themselves
politically to be an effective unified
voice
that can conduct foreign policy that can
enter into agreements and make
agreements stick
and also because of our aversion,
our complete aversion to terrorism.
So that's why we have taken the current
position. So I don't think we are being
anacronistic. I think we are being
realistic given the circumstances in
which Singapore has to operate in our
part of the world.
on defense.
I will I have already said that yes, it
is not a secret that they played a role
in our early years for which we are
grateful
and they continue to have an invaluable
role.
But again, that does not mean that we
are locked into giving them a free pass.
When you have
an equal and mutually respectful
partnership when you defer, you must be
prepared to say so to say so openly,
candidly and constructively. And we have
that kind of relationship.
I will not get into operational details
of defense. You know that it is the
government's established long-standing
policy not to publicly diver dulge
details
of defense cooperation
for national security reasons. So I'm
not going to go into that area. But I
give you this assurance. We are not
being held hostage.
Singapore will not allow itself to be
held hostage. Beyond that, I'm not going
to get into operational details and as
an NSM yourself, I'm sure you understand
that.
>> Dr. Shalin,
>> sorry. Um, acting minister first, Basha
Ibrahim,
>> thank the L for the supplementary
question or clarification.
If you look at the issue of
radicalization, there are many factors
uh that have account for it and also uh
there are also many incidents around the
world that's happening as well as uh not
only about the incidents also relating
to what uh our young people and
Singaporeans come across at social media
and also what they read and uh so I can
say that we are very fortunate to have
not only
enforcement agencies that really look at
how we can minimize or eradicate if
possible the uh issue of radicalization.
But we have community partners that work
together with us to go upstream and look
at how we can manage this and help our
people in promoting a harmonious and
peaceful living here. So I
try to think what the leader of
opposition is suggesting when he asked
that question. Is he suggesting that uh
that our policy stance has resulted in
radicalization?
So I just want to get his uh answer to
that.
>> Mr. Singh.
>> Thank you Mr. Speaker. not suggesting
that my
query to the senior minister of state
pertains to the threat landscape and the
environment and the question uh is not
something new. Um in 201
13 I
shared with this house uh that there's a
concern if
Singapore's position may have an impact
on the way people think about this
particular issue. If we are seen as too
close to the Israeli position,
is there uh any evidence that MHA has
that the close relationship contributes
to
uh a heightened environment of
radicalization
faced by Singapore. I think that's the
point. uh because we have had uh
episodes in the past and the uh MHA have
announced it where uh certain
individuals are held under ISA and they
cite this issue as one reason for uh
their thoughts and actions in so far as
planning violence in Singapore.
>> Mr. question.
>> I I thank the member for clarifying. Uh
so what is key is that in the security
agencies we look at all the different
areas certain things uh may have an
effect or perceive effect. Nevertheless,
in Singapore, if you have I mean you I'm
sure you are familiar as how we built
our nation. Uh what we do we understand
there are various things that affect how
a person thinks how that will invoke
emotion.
What we do, we work with community
partners, agencies and even if you uh
read at what the religious
rehabilitation group they are doing is
that they not only look at the Malay
Muslim is uh issues but they look at how
they can play a part in building a
peaceful harmonious and progressive
Singapore. So at the end of the day
looking at the Singapore's interest
linking back to what uh minister Vivven
has said earlier. So I want to reiterate
back that
issue of radicalization
comes from various factors and also if
you look at the profile of the different
individuals who have been so-called
radicalized or being uh in the early
stage or even the the the
advanced stage of radicalization there
are various factors that account for
that. So to pin down to just the policy
stance, I think uh it will not be
accurate and I think that I'm happy that
the LO has clarified his position in
this.
>> Dr. Shalin.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two
supplementary questions. Number one,
Singaporeans, including our residents in
Tes are saddened and anguished by the
war in Gaza. They wonder whether the
government can take further actions,
including tougher sanctions, to
demonstrate Singapore's objection
towards the atrocities. How can the
government better communicate the
government's approach and that this
approach is the best one for Singapore?
And when do we impose these sanctions?
My second supplementary question.
Like Gaza, Singapore is a small entity.
Small countries like ours rely on
international law for survival. How does
the ministry see Singapore's role in
speaking up for other small entities or
states when injustice occurs? And what
does the erosion of international rules
in this conflict signal for the security
of small states like ours? Thank you,
>> Minister Barak Krishna.
On the question of sanctions, this is in
fact the first time we are imposing
sanctions and you know I I would ask for
time to get to let us sort out the
details and for the announcements. The
larger point behind that is that this is
an expression of disapproval.
This is an expression that is in keeping
with our assessment of the situation of
what that it is wrong and it is enimical
to the long-term interests of both
Palestinians and Israel and it is a
reflection that we continue to believe a
two-state solution is the only viable
way forward on international law. I
think that is very clear because of our
own circumstances
we do have to abide by and we do need to
comply with international law. But it is
also equally important for you for us
all to understand the difference between
international law and domestic law is
that you can have a court in this case
international court of justice. In our
case, we have our own domestic courts.
But domestically, the enforcement
mechanisms
are there. Internationally,
enforcement actually depends on consent
from all the states involved. I say this
so that first we get a realistic
appreciation of the limits of
international law but we also understand
why as a small nation we cannot operate
on the basis of might is right and give
in to that every time someone invokes
that because that's enimical to our own
interests. But let me just bring the you
know the deliberations today back and
also partially refer to what uh the
leader of opposition was asking my
colleague.
Singapore
has to start with a realistic
appreciation of who we are which means
in particular multi-racial
multi-religious in Southeast Asia
in a part of the world which used to be
tamaltous and could be if things unravel
further
and who we are also means we are exposed
to external events and external
influence
and that is a reality. So we start with
a realistic appreciation of our
circumstances. Next, we need to guard
jealously our national interest. And
I've told you in this case, our national
interest is unity,
security, and support for international
law for what it is worth despite all the
limitations that it has. Now it's easy
to state that but on every issue we have
to triangulate between these three
poles. What is in our national interest
for security? What is in our national
interest for unity?
And what is in our national interest to
maintain international law? And
sometimes there is tension between these
three poles.
And the way we have to address it and
the way the PAP government has addressed
it is that when these tensions are
evident,
we talk about it constructively, openly,
delicately.
We do not play it up. We do not use it
to score domestic political points or to
split
our society in order to get short-term
political points.
So the larger point I'm trying to tell
all of us is that the world is messy and
the world has become far far more
dangerous and it will be increasingly
more and more difficult for Singapore to
just jealously guard its national
interest while keeping everybody
together
and we make our decisions in our own
national interest. It means we will not
always follow the crowd. Many times we
will be in a minority and we will not be
afraid to be in a minority so long as we
understand that we're taking a stand
based on principle. We're taking a stand
to defend our own people's welfare and
security
and that when we deal with Tory issues
we will discuss it openly, respectfully
and constructively. Your question is
there a risk that all these events
outside
Singapore can radicalize
our own people? Of course they can and
they have and we've seen evidence of
that. Is this the only source of
division and radicalization and
extremism in the world? No, it's not.
There are other parts of the world which
can also sow division, discord and
extremism in the world. Is this
something which we can resolve once and
for all with a discussion, a man a
ministerial statement or a debate in
parliament? No, we can't. This is always
going to be work in progress. And on
that note, I just want to make this
appeal also to to the leader of
opposition. This is one of those times
we need to make to make common cause.
You and I may defer on the timing
of recognition, but in the same way as I
describe our position via v the other
countries, I think we all ultimately
want the same thing. We want peace.
We don't want terrorism.
We want mutual respect between people
with complicated histories and identity.
And we want to be able to do good where
we can by working with as many
parties, as many entities as possible.
So this should be an occasion for unity
amidst the difficulty and we should be
very mindful in our conversations not
just in this house but outside this
house that we secure unity, security and
peace under international law. It is
possible and I still want to hold on to
that prospect. You know when we go to
the Middle East and those of you Mr.
with Gam was with me. I told I I could
tell the Israelis
and even the Arabs that you want a
one-state solution, your delegation,
your government must look like mine.
And everyone nods and yet also in their
heart of hearts they know it is not
possible. Well, if it is not possible,
that's why you need a two-state
solution. But on the other hand, we
should also be grateful for what we have
in Singapore,
but also understand it is always at
risk, always fragile, and we need to
jealously protect it and guard it.
>> Mr. Mr. Pongwing,
>> thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the
minister and SMS for the ministerial
statement. I have two clarifications.
Singapore's aid to Gaza demonstrates our
compassion for Palestinians. It also
signals our values as a principled small
state. My first clarification, how
effective has Singapore's humanitarian
assistance been in meeting the needs of
Gaza? My second clarification is this.
The International Association of
Genocide Scholars has declared that
Israel's actions in Gaza are consistent
with the legal definition of genocide.
Will the government call Israel out for
committing genocide? Thank you,
>> Minister Barakush.
>> I've outlined our 10 branches of
humanitarian assistance, whether by
airdrop or by supplies delivered over
land. I cannot attest to what happens
once it gets into Gaza. Uh but I take
the I I take the following attitude.
Number one, gratitude to Singaporeans
for generosity,
for expressing compassion in a very real
way and the fact that the funds raised
were raised in a multi-religious,
multi-racial
uh it is a very Singaporean expression
of compassion. That's first. Number two,
I'm grateful it was the SCF that played
a major role in the delivery and I thank
the SCF men and women and we should not
take safety for granted. These were real
these were operations. They were not
exercises.
So gratitude to the SCF.
Number three, I'm grateful that over the
six decades, we have built
close, respectful, and constructive ties
across all the countries in the Middle
East. So, we can base our air force in
Jordan. We can overfly Israel. We can
airdrop in Palestine. We can work with
our Egyptian partners whether to hand
over money or humanitarian assistance.
And right now, as I outlined just now,
work with Egyptian hospitals to look
after uh people who need medical care.
And we've got and I mentioned even
community policing. Well, this a project
which we're doing together with Japan to
train police officers
in the working under the Palestinian
Authority to prepare for future
statehood. So actually there's you know
there's a lot to be grateful of for and
to also reflect on the blessings that we
have in Singapore. It is a very
Singaporean expression of compassion in
action
on genocide. As I said earlier in the
statement I would leave this to be
determined by the International Court of
Justice. proceedings are in place are
underway. Um I don't think they have
fully heard the arguments on merit and
they certainly have not arrived at the
verdict but we will have to wait for
that and to act accordingly.
I can share with you what I told the
Israeli president and the delegation
members who are with me can attest to
that. And I I told him
because we are friends,
we also have a duty to be candid. And I
I told him it is true that the world has
double standards and the world expects
more of Israel because Israel was born
from the ashes of the Holocaust.
And if Israel loses its international
moral standing
authority,
that does untold strategic damage to
your long-term prospects. They didn't
push back on that point because they
know it is a sincerely held view from
someone who hopes for peace
for them and their neighboring people
who even in the darkest of times you
know have to hope they need hope that
there is there is a better way but again
be grateful for what we have in
Singapore.
>> Mr. Sakyandi Subupad, you have three PQ,
so go ahead.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won't be
asking three supplementary questions.
Uh, but I'll have one uh clarification
to uh Minister of Foreign Affairs. Uh is
in relation to the sanctions. Um you
shared the shift in position on the
targeted sanctions on the settler groups
and individuals. In fact, um I'm
thankful for to minister for sharing
that position slight change because if
you look at um the European Union, the
US, Canada, Australia, Japan and UK,
they also did similar uh sort of um
targeted sanctions back in 2024. So
Singapore shifting in 2025 uh is I think
in some ways not taken very lightly uh
and probably a very principled sort of
move especially when Singapore is a
financial hub. uh and uh seen as a
financial uh center. But my
clarification is um minister in a more
broader perspective the threshold of
taking broader sanctions on
Israel or the entity of the country
itself. Can you share how Singapore
would assess the actions of other
countries um going forward that have
imposed uh financial or economic
sanctions on on Israel and whether
there's scope for us to consider
enhancement meas similar enhancement
measures in a calibrated way uh only in
a situation where the Gaza situation
doesn't abate um how how would we take
uh take that into consideration and how
will be our principal assessment be so
my question is in fact about the
thresholds
What would be our principal guidelines
to shift to a different threshold on
broader sanctions? Thanks Minister
Minister Barrera.
Mr. Speaker, I will be frank
sanctions
are not something we enter into lightly.
But let us also not assume or presume
that sanctions will make a major
difference to facts on the ground. And I
say this not just with respect to what
we're proposing
uh for the settler groups but again
the world's history on sanctions and the
effectivity
uh I would say it's not a very you know
it's often more a statement of principle
an expression of disapproval
uh it would I wouldn't bank that
historically any set of sanctions have
been decisive in its own way. So like
many things in foreign policy it's a
multiple multivaried equation and
sometimes you need all the different
pieces the configuration to time to come
together in time and space for there to
be a a step change. So I'm not saying
that we entered into sanctions lightly.
It is for us a major statement. Uh but
I'm don't I don't want to overstate its
impact.
>> Mr. Chris Duza.
>> Uh thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank the
three ministers for their excellent
responses. uh my clarification is born
out of my uh understanding of the three
ministerial statements that in fact we
do have two levels of agency. The first
is diplomacy and accessibility that our
MFA has in the region. I think minister
you were gain you you gained access to
the UAE, Egypt, Palestinian territories
and Israel all at the same visit in 2024
and were able to listen to many
different levels of uh positions in each
that that their levels not being
homogeneous
and also the second level of agency
which is our SEF the Singapore Armed
Forces being able to deploy our
Charlie's our Charlie 130s airdrops
working with Jordanian Air Force. So I
feel um humbly proud if that's the
correct word to use that we have two
excellent institutions with major agency
and I'd like to ask what we as a small
country in this part of the world is
able to do with these two levels of
agency to work together with like-minded
countries to bring about dialogue and
discussion between two sides in the
Middle East conflict
uh to achieve as best as we can maximum
hope for peace and stability while
obviously also
having a close eye on what our national
interests are. So how can we use the
agencies of
diplomacy in the form of MFA and
humanitarian assistance in the form of
the SEF to bring about
one step closer to peace in the region.
Thank you
>> Minister Bak Krishna.
I'm I'm always pleasantly
surprised or gratified by the access
that we have
and my conclusion after
years in this
is people give us access because number
one they've heard of Singapore they've
heard of Mr. the lewanu
they hear our prime ministers
both what they say domestically and
internationally it travels and is
credible.
So our they know we're a successful
country. They know we are a united
country
and united across race, language and
religion.
They know we are serious-minded people.
They know as
professor fell said just now we don't
when we say something we actually take
it seriously. We commit to it and we
deliver.
They don't expect us to,
you know, completely echo their
positions. In fact, they know that we
are serious-minded, we are careful,
we're deliberate,
and we don't just follow the crowd. And
that's precisely why I think we get
access and why we get at least a polite
hearing. And where we can make common
cause and where we can sign agreements
and do things together, we do. and
Singapore and Singaporeans are welcome
throughout even troubled spots because
of this reputation.
But at the same time, we also should
retain a sense of realism and humility.
We can't solve
very difficult thorny issues all over
the world to the extent that we can
extend our friendship, our support, our
humanitarian assistance
if they want to use us sometimes
officially or unofficially
uh as a venue. We are happy to port tea
uh but we should never never
overestimate
our abilities.
uh to deal with very difficult issues
globally. So I am quite content to play
a constructive and useful role but not
to be made use of. At the same time
bearing in mind that the moment
Singapore fails or is disunited or that
the leaders of Singapore are no longer
credible,
it's game over. We will be irrelevant.
In other words, is not so much exactly
the details of your decision, but the
basis by which we organize ourselves,
arrive at decisions,
make commitments, stick to commitments,
deliver the goods, and behave in a
consistent, constructive, law-abiding
uh way. I mean I I I don't want to use
the word moral where states are
concerned but you know what I mean.
There's a certain code by which people
know Singapore will always behave and
for that they will accept that we will
be different from time to time but it is
respect and we can do some good and
that's the that's the way I I I conduct
our relations with other countries.
Miss.
>> Thank you, speaker.
Singapura
[Music]
Gaza West Bank
and in terms of our interests, It's not
just a matter of national security for
us in Singapore, but arguably also a
question of national conscience as many
have expressed very strong views. I have
two SQS. How do we expect the proposed
sanctions to move the needle on peace
and desired outcomes including a
two-state solution given the very
extreme views on both sides as mentioned
by minister including members of the
Israeli government who have rejected the
two-state solution not just political
activists or settlers in the West Bank
by vowing to destroy Gaza. You have in
your answer to the honorable member Mr.
Sakiandi earlier mentioned that
sanctions have not always proven to be
effective and I seek minister's views on
how we can we envision these sanctions
could impact Israel Palestine as well as
other actors for example the US. Uh
second SQ minister also mentioned how we
have consistently mentioned uh
maintained open lines of communication
with both ends and that this is
important not just in times of peace but
also during times of crisis. Uh so will
the government thus consider using these
open lines of communication to support
perhaps ceasefire negotiations in some
shape or form more directly beyond the
humanitarian assistance. Thank you Mr.
Speaker.
>> Minister Barak Kushner.
>> I'm grateful for your questions and I
appreciate where you're coming from. But
again, I want to urge uh a sense of
realism. Will sanctions from a small
city state like Singapore move the
needle on its own? No, it won't.
But is it an expression
of our views?
It is. Will the Israelis notice it? Oh,
I'm sure they will notice it precisely
because they know that we are careful,
deliberative,
constructive
partners who want the best for their
long-term survival and for their
neighbors, the Palestinians.
So we we should be realistic about what
we say and do and the effect of what we
say and do
on open lines of communication
now on ceasefire negotiations. So I want
to give full credit to our friends in
Qatar
and Egypt and in the case of Qatar even
taking you know facing danger for being
a venue for such negotiations and we
should give them our fullest support
and
appreciation and respect for doing that.
Can Singapore play such a role? I don't
see that in the imminent future. Uh and
again you need to understand the nature
of conflicts in in diplomacy that
the most effective
peacemakers
have to be both trusted
by both sides and have leverage
because you know the world is not short
of conference venues where people can
meet and have a nice cup of tea.
But it needs to be a place where both
sides feel that they are safe
and that you're not playing games.
But very often to force two sides which
are very far away apart from each other
and sometimes to be honest even having
subsegments of the two sides who are
working at cross purposes
you need leverage.
Now, as far as I'm concerned, what the
last two years have illustrated
is that actually
the
single superpower with real leverage in
the Middle East is the United States of
America.
depending on those decisions made in
Washington which will also reflect its
own complex domestic
political situation.
That is where real leverage may or may
not be applied to bring
at least an interim
ceasefire
hopefully a permanent ceasefire and the
release of all hostages. So again, my
plea is, you know, be realistic about
what we can do, what we should do. And I
I accept your point that our words and
our actions should reflect what we stand
for.
And we cannot close our eyes and close
our ears and keep silent when things are
clearly wrong and unconscionable.
And I hope I've made the point that we
have not been such a party. So we are
not fair weather friends. We are all
weather friends, but we're also friends
who tell you hard truths. To the extent
that we can help, we will help. But we
will not push and overstay our welcome
or overestimate
our ability to solve problems which have
defied solutions for decades, centuries
or sometimes millennia.
Mr. Sher Chen, you also had a PQ on this
for tomorrow sitting.
>> Thank you speaker. So I have a
clarification for the minister. um
similar to honorable colleagues Mr.
Sakyandi and Miss Nadia um question
about sanctions but I'd like to go
specifically to the context uh also of
the question that I filed which is
regarding Israel's attack in Qatar.
The ministerial statements did not quite
answer my question but I know MFA has
put out a statement condemning the
attack and stating that it is an
egregious violation of Qatar's
sovereignty. So given that Singapore has
been a staunch supporter of this core
principle of respect of the sovereignty
of all nations big and small not not
just any piece of international law but
of this very core principle of
international law because it is
fundamental to our survival as a small
state and therefore
Singapore has also responded robustly to
other instances of the violation of
sovereignty of other nations by other
nations. in the past going beyond verbal
condemnation imposing sanctions
how does Singapore's response in this
instance to Israel's attack in Qatar
compute
visav our responses to past instances of
violation of sovereignty and can we not
consider imposing sanctions
as an expression of our disapproval
um to this to a violation of this very
core principle of international law.
Thank you,
>> Minister Mar Krishnan.
>> Mr. Speaker, we condemned the attack in
Doha by Israel and we said so publicly
and there's no doubt in anybody's mind
where we stand on that and we stand on
that again because again the same
question went through my mind. What if
it happened here? what would we do and
what would we say?
Having said that, I think you are asking
whether we should go further and I'm not
inclined to do so further because
otherwise you end up having to chase
every and every infraction which
countries uh engage in against each
other and us having to respond. So I my
preference is to reserve it for the most
egregious the most important issues
where we need to make a point again for
Qatar
thei the United States largest air base
in the Middle East is in Qatar.
the rail player who could and should
have ensured security.
Well, I I I think I I I don't need to I
don't want to cause more problems, but
you all can think about that. All right.
Again, my my the larger point I'm making
to all of us, please have a realistic
view of what Singapore can and cannot
do. My own view is with with the
Qataris. I was in we were in contact
immediately. They know where we stand.
They appreciate it. I'll stand. Uh but
there are some much bigger players who
need to resolve the very awkward set of
questions that that attack uh posed. But
also let's bear in mind um that this is
a dangerous and unpredictable world. And
can you again I want to persuade
everyone to come back to the zero
tolerance
for breach of international law and zero
tolerance for terrorism
and zero tolerance therefore for
you know uh even accepting any
justifications or pretext
uh for terrorism and harboring them. Um
again at some risk I will also tell you
that there are offices
of terrorist
organizations in our region.
It is an objective reality
and we need to be mindful and we need to
be careful. So we don't want to say too
much but there are some things which you
need we need to be aware of and we need
to take appropriate precautions from but
maybe you should ask minister Shan for
that.
>> Mr. Joe
thank the ministers for his answers. The
minister stated that Singapore will
reconsider its deci its position on
recognizing the Palestinian state if the
situation continues to deteriorate or if
Israel takes any further steps to
extinguish the two-state solution. Given
the continued expansion of Israeli
settlements, the Israeli government
stated policy that quote there will be
no Palestinian state and even their
alleged targeting of peace negotiators
in Qatar. Does the minister not consider
these to be severe enough to trigger a
re-evaluation of Singapore's position?
Now, second, the minister said that
Singapore will recognize Palestine when
it has an effective government that
accepts Israel's right to exist and
categorically renounces terrorism. But
the Palestinian Authority has already
made a commitment to renounce terrorism
and carry out reforms. What additional
steps does the PA need to take in order
for Singapore to recognize the state of
Palestine?
Minister Barak Krishna.
>> Mr. Speaker, I you know I just made a
ministerial statement. Announce
sanctions, announce conditional
recognition. Uh you're you're already
jumping and asking me to re-evaluate the
position. I I would say let's
watch very very carefully how things
unfold in the days, weeks, and months.
I've set out for all of us our principal
considerations and the variables which
we are watching and we will decide
accordingly. I don't want to jump the
gun and you know enter into excessively
hypothetical
discussions. Um your second question was
what else is necessary for the
Palestinian Authority?
I wish they were in charge in Gaza,
but you and I know they are not or
certainly not yet.
But we continue to work with them. We
continue to build up the capacity. We
continue to prepare them for eventual
statehood and for the time when they can
be in charge. I should also add if you
look if you read carefully all the
statements of those who have apparently
changed position in the last two days, I
very seriously doubt any of them can
actually begin the actual process of
normalization as long as hostages are
still held in the tunnels of Gaza.
So you know it's how
I I think the best way to understand
this is everyone wants the same end
point
but there can be arguments about when
and how the route you take to reach the
ultimate destination.
We have had almost an hour of
clarifications. I have called on every
member who had fought questions on this
except for two, Mr. Shah Taha and Mr.
Dennis Tan. And now I'll call Mr. Shahu
Taha first.
>> Thank you speaker. I'd like to thank Min
Minister Vivian for his clarification
that we will recognize the Palestinian
state and it's a question of when and if
not if. I appreciate the position has
evolved uh given the deteriorating
circumstances. However, many may find it
hard to uh understand the preconditions
uh and could approach it from a very
binary. It's either we support or we
don't support which can lead to a lot of
misunderstanding especially when other
countries uh have had their individual
separate reasons for doing so. So my
question to the minister is how can we
better communicate this position of ours
so that there is no misunderstanding
within the country and with other
countries. That's my first SQ. Second SQ
is to the SMS of Minister of Home
Affairs. Uh
just give me a second
and I'll ask you in Malays
Singapura.
[Music]
Thank you.
>> Minister Krishna,
>> this has been longer than my cos.
You know the question is how to
communicate better. I don't know whether
it means I obviously have not been able
to communicate uh effectively or maybe
this is a chance for me to iterate the
key the key points. All right. And maybe
let me take that opportunity.
We believe both the Israeli state
and the Palestinian state deserve to
exist.
That's why we have always supported the
Palestinians right for
self-determination
and their own homeland.
We also acknowledge the historical
complexities
and that's why from the river to the sea
is not possible for either party
and they have to find the wisdom and the
leadership
to create a two-state solution where
they can live in peace and security.
Number three,
whilst we recognize Israel's right to
exist and we recognize Israel's need to
be strong,
there is also wisdom in knowing how to
use your strength. And you can win a
tactical victory
and lose
the strategic
war.
And for what is worth, this is what we
are telling
the Israelis
and have been doing so for some time.
Next point. We know that anything
Singapore says or does is not going to
resolve the situation on the ground in
the Middle East.
But for what it is worth, we will
express a stand which is consistent with
our own identity and values as a
multi-racial, multi-religious state. and
we will do our best to extend
humanitarian assistance as a real
expression of the compassion, the
collective compassion of Singaporeans.
And that's why today we reach this point
of conditional recognition for
Palestine.
We hope and wait and will support and
take efforts to hopefully make that an
objective reality.
And in the meantime, we have targeted
sanctions to express our disapproval for
further moves to make a two-state
solution impossible.
So that's my TLDDR summary of the last
two hours.
>> Acting Minister Pa
forcess.
[Music]
for
such a
[Music]
hospital.
Uh,
Singapore.
Fore
commitment.
Inc.
aspect.
for
Singapore.
and
then unique.
university
for the last clarification to the
ministers Mr. Dennis,
>> foreign minister to explain the
rationale behind uh Singapore voting for
the re the recent UN resolution on the
19th of uh September calling for the
participation of Palestine at the
opening of the 18 uh 80th session of the
UN General Assembly while still
withholding the recognition of a
Palestinian state. Thank you.
Minister Balakrishan,
>> we voted in favor of that resolution
because if you read the resolution in
its entirety, you will see that it is
actually a comprehensive one uh which I
would say makes many
countries who voted for it. There will
be parts of it which they agree, there
will be parts of it which they disagree.
Uh but it is one of the few or one of
the fewer UN resolutions that actually
calls out October 7 as a terrorist act
committed by Hamas that calls for the
immediate release of hostages.
also calls for immediate ceasefire
and also calls
ultimately for
a state of Palestine to take its place
in the United Nations. We voted for it
because we look at it in totality. This
is something which we support or which
want to happen which we hope will
happen. Even if as I said the objective
reality has not yet occurred, right?
Hostages are still being held in
tunnels. Hamas is still in power
in Gaza. Nevertheless, we take we we
voted in favor of it because we think
this solution
encapsulates
uh the full width of measures needed in
the long run for hopefully peace to come
to this region. So hence our vote. I can
assure you our votes in the UN are never
uh performative or cynical. We do so on
the basis of principle and of a careful
assessment of our national interests.
Order and of ministerial statements. The
club will now proceed to read the order
of the day.
Item one, president's speech, address of
thanks. A motion standing in the name of
Mr. Shah Taha.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker.
Sir, I beg to move that the following
address in reply to the speech of the
president be agreed to. We, the
Parliament of the Republic of Singapore,
express our thanks to the president for
the speech which he delivered on behalf
of the government at the opening of the
first session of this parliament.
Mr. Speaker, the president's address
reminded us of the profound transitions
of our time, a world in flux both both
globally and at home. We see the
sharpening rivalry between the United
States and China and the erosion of the
rules-based order that has enabled
Singapore to survive so far.
Increasingly,
we face a divided world where
aggression, coercion, and the
weaponization of trade have become
commonplace. While rapid techn
technological change reshapes our
societies at an unprecedented pace.
Against this backdrop, the president set
out four key challenges. Firstly,
securing our country against both
conventional and unconventional threats.
Secondly, transforming our economy while
tackling existential challenges such as
climate change. Thirdly, assuring
Singaporeans at every stage of life on
jobs, housing, healthcare, and cost of
living. And fourth, strengthening our
social compact so that work is fairly
valued fairly, the vulnerable are kept
for with compassion and every
Singaporean is empowered to pursue their
dreams.
More importantly, he reminded us that
our future depends on unity, nurturing a
weer society built on trust, resilience,
and shared purpose.
Mr. Speaker, the president characterized
this as not just transient headwinds,
but rather fundamental shifts in the
tide. And in times of change, two
emotions shape our human response.
one of anxiety and another one of hope.
And it is through this lens that I shape
my speech today.
Mr. Speaker, the confluence of supply
chain realignment, geopolitical
conflicts, tariffs, rapid advances in
AI, and the fracturing of societies due
to distrust has fueled deep anxiety. The
world ahead feels unpredictable and
uncertain.
As an MP and through my professional
experience, I've had conversations with
the residents of Pasares Changi,
Singaporeans from all walks of life,
foreign professionals, investors,
businesses from MNC's and SMMES to local
stallh holders in our pasa. In our
communities, including the Malay Muslim
community, two anxieties stand out most
clearly. Firstly on jobs on
employability
about fresh graduates seeking their
first role mid-career workers striving
to stay relevant and seniors struggling
to find opportunities
and secondly on the cost of living and
the cost of doing business from rents to
wages to dealing with tariffs.
Let me begin with jobs and employability
with a focus on fresh graduates. In
conversation with fresh graduates, a
common refrain is their struggle to land
that first job. Many tell me that they
have sent over a 100 CVs without a
single reply. They have tried LinkedIn,
career coaches, networking events, peer
support groups yet remain unemployed.
Parents to share their anxiety
contrasting today's reality with the
past when jobs came more quickly.
Graduates lemon that companies demand
experience, but without the opportunity,
how can they ever gain it? Silence from
employers with CVs submitted leaves them
questioning whether these vacancies are
real, whether they are being overlooked
or whether they are deeper structural
issues in the job market. The data
reflects this struggle. MOM reported on
17th September that while employment for
fresh graduates soon after university
rose by 4% in 2024 the rate remains at
just 51.9%
leaving about 8,600 still unemployed. A
joint survey by N US NTU SMU SUSS and
SUTD showed only 87.1% of graduates
secured work within 6 months in 2024
down from 89.6%
in 2023. continuing a declining trend
since 2022. For private institution
graduates, outcomes were worse with
fewer securing jobs and fewer securing
full-time roles. Youth unemployment
under 30 also inched up from 5.4% to
5.7%.
However, this is not a simple private
education institute institution versus
autonomous university comparison. The
real issue is whether courses equip
graduates with the skills the industry
demands. The trend is clear. Our young
graduates face a tougher, more uncertain
path, and we must work together to make
things better for them.
On the other hand, employers see the
problem differently, but no less
seriously. MNC's,memes,
and local enterprises all share the same
challenge. They cannot find enough
Singaporeans to fill their roles. Hiring
managers struggle to find the right
candidates and the data supports this.
Unemployment remains below 2% yet there
are still more vacancies than job
seekers. 1.64 jobs per unemployed
person. The 2025 manpower group
employment outlook survey found that 43%
of employers still intend to hire. on my
career's future. More than 23,000 of the
68,000 listed jobs are for fresh
graduates, executives, and senior
executives in roles such as engineers,
marketeers, data specialists, and
operational planners. So, we face a
paradox.
Graduates say they cannot find jobs
while businesses say they cannot find
workers. The mismatch lies not in the
numbers but in alignment between skills
taught and skills and experience
demanded and between expectation and
realities.
NTZ has framed this paradox through four
gaps. The expectation gap, the skills
gap, the opportunity gap and the
experience gap. I would like to add a
fifth, the job redesign gap.
On the expectation gap, technology has
reshaped hiring. With one-click portals
and AI tailored CVs, job seekers can now
apply for dozens, if not hundreds of
roles daily. Employers are swamped with
CVS, making it unrealistic to expect
replies to every applicant. Job seekers
and their parents must adjust to this
new reality on the job redesign gap with
AI.
Sorry, that was an alarm gap. Apologies.
On the job redesign gap with AI,
businesses are struggling to define
entry-level roles fast enough. Task one
once designed by fresh graduates such as
research, doing slides, doing minutes
are now automated. Companies need
graduates who can apply AI but within a
business context. This requires
rethinking roles so fresh graduates
remain cost-effective contributors while
still gaining the experience.
So how do we bridge these gaps then? And
I would like to offer four suggestions.
Firstly, scale up the graduate industry
trainership program GRI. Let me declare
my interest as a WSG board member. Grid
supports graduates from universities,
police, IT and private institutions
giving them industry relevant skills. It
provides an allowance up to 70% funded
by WSG and 30% by host organizations.
By October 2025, there will be 800
structured trainerships. The challenge
is to scale it up. We need more
businesses to come forward to invest in
our graduates to mentor them to give
them the business context and prepare
them for future roles.
Second,
expand structured apprenticeships.
Singapore had made progress with the AI
apprenticeship program and the Oracle
program, but we must extend this model
to other sectors such as manufacturing,
healthcare, logistics, operations, and
the green economy. Unlike short
unstructured internships which has
limited success, apprenticeships must
provide both technical training, the
business context and workplace
readiness.
Thirdly, to strengthen collaboration
between government, industries and
education institutions must align their
efforts and set standards. Germany's
dual education system is instructive,
combining classroom learning with real
workplace training, which produces
industry ready talent. By adapting some
of the useful elements of such approach,
Singapore can fill critical skills gap
and uplift our vocational careers.
Fourthly, about encouraging community
initiatives in Pasar Changi, one of our
volunteers Arshad together with Alma and
MCube and Pasar Changi organized an over
bike overnight biking event ending with
professionals sharing their work
experience with youths. Such grassroot
efforts from peer support groups can
link professional networks to the job
seekers. Mr. Speaker, the anxieties of
jobs sorry, let me repeat that again.
Mr. Speaker, the the anxieties of job
seekers are real and the frustrations of
businesses are real, but so too are the
opportunities. If government,
businesses, educators, unions, and the
communities stand together in a we first
spirit, we can close the gap, redesign
roles, and prepare people for the
future.
Mr. Speaker, the cost of living has
risen globally due to supply chain
disruptions, conflicts, and tougher
business conditions. In Singapore,
pressures are compounded by our reliance
on imports and tight labor market. While
we can manage volatility, we remain a
price taker. The sustainable path
forward is for wages to rise faster than
cost through productivity and to better
jobs. Government support through CDC
vouchures, USA and CCC rebate, cash
payouts, and medicave topups has
provided some cushioning for families.
But the rising cost of doing business
must not be overlooked.
Small shops such as FNB outlets,
retailers, mini mats, lifestyle shops,
lifestyle stores, gyms and neighborhood
shops are placemakers, the heartbeat of
our communities. They greet us daily,
serve our family for years and give our
area character. They make our
communities vibrant and provide comfort
in the familiarity of everyday life. Yet
behind the counter, many face this deep
anxiety. They pour their savings into
renovations and equipment only to find
leases shorter than their recovery
periods. For some, rent forms up to 20%
of their cost. The looming fear of the
next rent increase weighs heavily on
their minds. Many cannot simply pass the
cost to customers without losing them.
Nor can they sustain wages for their
staff if margins collapse. This
uncertainty forces them to worry about
survival instead on focusing on growth.
We must give these small businesses
greater assurance and I'd like to offer
a few suggestions. First, we should
build on the fair tenency framework
developed during COVID 19. It covers 11
areas of fair terms but remains
voluntary and does not address rent
escalation. I'm not suggesting rent
control in any way. Instead, let us
provide incentives such as tax benefits
or recognition for landlords who adopt
these fair guidelines. Transparent
rental benchmarks tied to indices like
CPI plus margin for rent escalations can
prevent unreasonable hikes while
preserving fairness. Secondly, we can
explore property tax rebates or
co-unding schemes for landlords who
maintain affordable rents or offer
support for landlords who help tenants
go digital or improve productivity. Mr.
Speaker, this is ultimately about trust
and partnership. By embracing a we first
mindset, landlords, businesses,
government can lower costs, reduce
uncertainty, and give small shops some
peace of mind. They may also encourage
entrepreneurship and support the startup
culture. When our small businesses worry
less about survival, they can focus on
what matters, improving their services,
raising their productivity, and
developing their staff. That is how we
keep our communities vibrant, our
livelihoods secured, and our society
coming together.
Mr. Speaker, growing our economy is not
for the sake of growth alone. It is
about securing good jobs for
Singaporean, ensuring rising incomes,
and improving the quality of life for
our people. In every strategy that we
take, our end goal must always be clear.
to create opportunities that uplift our
workers, strengthen our families, and
build a society where every Singaporean
can look to the future with confidence.
Mr. Speaker, while these fundamental
shifts in the tide has stirred deep
anxieties that we must address, we must
also remember that change is not only
about disruption. Change also brings
renewal, new opportunities, new
industries, and new ways of living. I'm
encouraged that the government has
formed the special economic resilience
task force to help us seize these
opportunities and chart our path forward
with unity and with purpose. In this
period, I would like to offer a few
suggestions on how we can turn this
moment of change into one of renewal and
growth.
Firstly on growth industries,
opportunities are opening in artificial
intelligence, advanced manufacturing,
biotech, clean energy, and
sustainability. In EDB's report, it was
stated that AI adoption could enhance
productivity across all sectors, notably
adding up to 27 billion 27 billion to
manufacturing alone. In its totality, AI
is projected to unlock billions in
productivity gains across sectors. While
advanced manufacturing and robotics will
drive high value career in precision
engineering, biotech is transforming
medicine, food and material science. And
clean energy from renewables from
renewables to emerging technologies like
small modular nuclear reactors will
strengthen our energy security. Beyond
these niche sectors such as quantum
technologies, space and satellite
services, cyber security, and the blue
economy, they all hold potential for new
growth. These industries are not the
ends in themselves. They are pathways to
secure better jobs, higher incomes, and
long-term competitiveness for our
Singaporeans.
Secondly, businesses need clear whole of
government support to navigate
uncertainty. We must refresh our
industry transformation maps and align
them with the job transformation maps,
our CTC's, our national AI strategy, our
CTO as a service and all the other
alphabet soups of support schemes that
we have. Many businesses especially find
the landscape a bit fragmented and a bit
harder to navigate. A single agency or a
unified user oriented portal could help
simplify the access enabling firms to
focus on transformation and focus on
growth.
By doing so, we strengthen our
enterprises, preserve Singapore's
position as a trusted global hub and
ensure that the opportunities created at
the national level translate into
tangible gains for workers and families.
Thirdly, we must anchor Singapore's
aspiration to remain a global aviation
and aerospace hub. And here I'd like to
declare my interest as one of the
workers in the aerospace industry.
Today, Singapore accounts for 10% of a
world's global MRO output.
Imagine that. Our small red dot
accounting to 10% of the world's global
MRO output. And MRO is one of the key
pillars of our manufacturing 2030 vision
which seeks to grow manufacturing value
add by 50% by 2030. To sustain this
growth, we should review the master plan
for the northeast Singapore
holistically.
From the developments in Chinese
terminal 5 to Chinese air freight center
to Chinese east urban district, Chinese
east industrial zone, Chinese northa
pong dig digital district and the
reconfiguration of the loyang industrial
estate
together with the rethinking of the pas
chi ecosystem including preserving the
rustic charm of Pulaubin, the mangroves
and both pas and changi beach. This
entire region on the northeast coast can
be transformed into worldclass zone to
leave to work and to play sustainably
anchored by the future growth of
industries and seamlessly connected by
air through Changi airport by sea
through Tanamera ferry terminal and to
the rest of Singapore via the cross
island and the east west MRT lines and
within less than 60 minutes of Pangarang
just 20 km away and Batam the northeast
Singapore is also strategically
positioned to complement Pangarang's oil
and gas sector at the Pungarang
integrated complex and Batam's
manufacturing base. In addition to its
central location and its global
connectivity
together with Joho Singapore SEZ, this
ecosystem can secure good jobs for
Singaporean, boost supply chain
resilience and anchor Singapore firmly
within the global economy.
Mr. Speaker, hope must also mean
inclusion.
Growth cannot be just for some. It must
be for all. An inclusive society is one
where every Singaporean has a chance to
contribute and more importantly
flourish.
Technology can and must be used for
good. And there are ways to which we can
use technology towards building a more
inclusive society. Firstly, through the
through supporting the less abled
assistive technologies such as screen
readers, navigation apps, sensors
provide independence. For example, AI
powered wayfinding tools integrated into
MRT stations can help guide the visually
impaired. One of my residents who he
lost his sight and is is in his 50s.
Sorry, one of my residents lost his
sight in his 50s. He travels with his
elderly mother in a wheelchair and his
special needs sister who's also in the
50s. Each contributes a different sense
of touch, of of mobility, of vision and
as and of knowledge as they navigate
through the the town. He was excited by
the pilot of wayfinding tools such as
City G uh City Genie to help his family
move independently.
More can be done for families like this
and with a we first mindset agencies and
partners can make inclusive innovation a
reality. Secondly, through supporting
caregivers while grants like home
caregiving grant help financially
technology can lighten the load. Smart
elder care sensors, teley health, AI
enabled and robotic aids can reduce
strain. Scaling this solution into
community care networks while keeping
them affordable gives caregivers a peace
of mind and helps seniors live with
dignity. We must find ways to adopt them
quicker and scale faster to move beyond
pilot trials. Mr. Speaker, inclusiv
inclusive innovation is not only about
compassion. It is about bringing that
opportunity. The assistive tax center,
the assistive tax sector, Ketchek and
the silver economy are fast growing
industries. By investing here, Singapore
can export solutions and become a
trusted hub for inclusive technology. We
will build not only a competitive
economy, but also a compassionate one
where every citizens feel the feel they
matter and belong. Mr. Speaker, in
Malay, please.
President,
President
Fore
to one speaker.
conflict
reality
Ice takerity
[Music]
Program Skills Credit WSQ
Tech Accelerator Program
[Music]
industry
advanced manufacturing, robotics,
precision engineering, biotech, quantum
technology, satellite services done
Professional
[Music]
technology.
for
professional.
Robotensch.
Welfare home
[Music]
salary guidelines.
guideline CSG
global
USS
institative.
We first society
president.
Let me repeat that again. Speaker
Program.
Mr. Speaker, sir, the challenge before
us are real. The anxieties of our people
are real. The worries by our job
seekers, the struggles of our families
coping with cost, and the worries of
small businesses are real. Yet, so too
are the opportunities in new industries,
in new inclusive innovation, and in
refresh economic strategies that can
bring about better jobs and better ways
to care for our society. Let us
therefore choose to be a we first
society. A society where success is not
just measured by GDP but by how much we
care for one another. Where growth is
inclusive and opportunities are shared
and no Singaporean is left behind. Where
quality of life improves not just for
individuals but for families and for
communities. Where government,
businesses, union workers and citizens
work together in trust. This is how we
can turn anxiety into hope. And this is
how we can renew our social compact. And
this is how we can build a stronger,
more united Singapore together. Majula
Singapura. Mr. Speaker, sir, I beg to
move.
The question is that the following
address in reply to the speech of the
president be agreed to. We the
parliament of the Republic of Singapore
express our thanks to the president for
the speech which he delivered on behalf
of the government at the opening of the
first session of this parliament.
Mr. Pritam Singh
[Music]
So, I thank the president for his
address.
While the Workers Party is in
opposition, we call on Singaporeans to
heed the call to build a better
Singapore for ourselves and our future
generations.
Today, I will highlight what the Workers
Party sees as the international and
domestic pressures facing us. After
that, I will focus on the president's
call for a we first society, a term that
Prime Minister Lawrence Wong also used
at his National Day rally last month.
First, the international situation. I
entered politics in 2011, and I remember
at the time a newly retired minister
shed tears at a press conference over
what, I quote, globalization had done to
Singaporean workers," unquote.
This year, US President Donald Trump has
challenged globalization more directly
than ever before. His Liberation Day
tariffs in April put the brakes on
several decades of an economic era that
Singapore had ridden successfully,
albeit not without its discontents for
some Singaporeans.
For the foreseeable future, near
shoring, friend shoring, and
protectionism
are the order of the day. We enter an
uncertain and unpredictable post SG60
world. Of great concern to us is what
sectoral tariffs could be imposed on
Singapore, especially for two industries
that together contribute 40% of our GDP,
pharmaceuticals and semiconductors.
To use the parliament of the late US
Secretary of Defense Donald Ramsfeld,
the imposition of additional tariffs on
Singapore exports to the US
are more of a known unknown rather than
an unknown unknown.
In the Asia- Pacific, we are in the
throws of a geostrategic transition.
Recently, China showcased both its
ambition as well as its alliances at a
spectacular military parade
commemorating 80 years since the end of
World War II.
China demonstrated that it is ready to
take its place as a leading power in the
world. China, a hugely successful
economic power, is fast becoming a
military juggernaut. It can no longer
bite its time nor hide its strength. To
many, this must mean a dimmunition of US
influence in the Asia-Pacific.
But China appears to have considered
that it need not behave like a hedgeim
and displace back Americana.
China seems intent on deepening
friendships and collaboration
thereby representing itself as a force
for stability and cooperation
even as it stands up to America whenever
it deems necessary.
As for the US, its current
administration is reccalibrating the
norms and values that traditionally
underpinned its preeminent position in
the Asia-Pacific and beyond. However,
the US still retains significant
goodwill from many Asia-Pacific
countries. Its historical actions at the
cost of American blood arrested the
advance of communism in the region. It
provided an effective security umbrella
that allowed Southeast Asian nations
including Singapore to grow and prosper.
There may well be enough space for the
US and China to coexist in the region
even as flash points such as Taiwan
and possible nuclear weapons
proliferation in East Asia remain known
unknowns.
What is clear is that defense spending
is rising all around. We must brace for
turbulence even as we hope that the
turbulence remains only that while we
look to secure our future in a new
strategic environment.
So I ended my budget speeches in 2024
and 2025 with calls to strengthen our
national unity a multi-racial national
unity in an uncertain world. A strong
SCF home team and a first rate
diplomatic core give us the agency to
think for ourselves and our own national
interests. The current strategic
environment is yet another reminder of
how critical the Singapore armed forces,
the home team agencies and MFA are. It
also reinforces the importance of
national service. The security that our
people in uniform provide is an
important strength for Singapore. I
repeat this call today in light of the
president's address.
Domestically,
SG60 comes at a unique inflection point
for us. In the next few years, one in
four Singaporeans will be older than 65
and labor force participation is not
likely to rise. This is part of a long
anticipated transition.
In fact, the first ministerial committee
on aging was set up decades ago.
However, living through a transition and
being on the cusp of it hit differently.
The job front is unpredictable.
Technology is rendering jobs obsolete
quicker than ever before. Middle-aged
workers who change jobs report being
unable to command the same salaries. And
anecdotally, young people are finding it
tougher to secure good jobs.
In addition, more employers prefer to
offer short-term contract jobs rather
than permanent positions.
Cost of living continues to dominate as
business profit margins get squeezed,
particularly for smaller businesses that
face steep rental hikes. Even our
cultural capital is being hollowed out
and in transition to something
unfamiliar.
From the slow demise of traditional
foods to the closing down of cinemas and
the downsiz downsizing of bookstores,
all this contributes to a sense of loss
that weighs heavily on many
Singaporeans.
These emotions are not unexpected
because Singaporeans do not want to
become a people who know the price of
everything but the value of nothing.
We must try to preserve as much of our
of the different strands of our cultural
tapestry in our national interest
instead of resigning ourselves to the
inevitability of change.
Just as there is value in learning new
things, there is value in remembering
the past and the wisdom it endows.
At this critical junction in our
nation's journey, how does the workers
party define its parliamentary role?
Five years ago at the opening of
parliament then I said that the workers
party will chart an independent path and
fulfill its duty as a loyal opposition.
Our loy our loyalty is to the people and
to the nation. And this term fidelity to
the three key functions of parliament to
make laws to check on the government and
to scrutinize the state's finances will
come into distinct focus.
On the back of the opening of Parliament
and our first sitting today, the Workers
Party MPs in line with our critical and
inquisitorial role to hold the
government accountable have asked
topical parliamentary questions covering
housing and specifically the HTB
voluntary early redevelopment scheme of
Vers jobs, education and specifically
bullying in schools, employment, foreign
affairs and transport to name a few.
With so much happening domestically and
internationally, the opposition will
primarily focus on the function that
parliament demands of us, checking the
government's policies and actions. Mr.
Speaker, I wish to assure you that the
Workers Party will not file
parliamentary questions to rack up
numbers.
Every question we ask is one that needs
asking, especially since the opposition
does not receive any special government
briefings unlike the PAP MPs and neither
are their parliamentary select
committees to scrutinize the work of the
various ministries when parliament is
not in session.
For example, over the last three months,
as we heard during parliamentary
question time today,
there has been a spate of MRT breakdowns
from July to date. There have been at
last count 15 disruptions,
some more significant than others.
Like anything mechanical, breakdowns do
occur and this in and off itself is not
the issue.
However, many Singaporeans find this
quick succession of breakdowns to be
highly unusual, particularly after
significant taxpayer resources have been
expended to raise rail reliability
over the last decade.
This will have to be scrutinized in
parliament, including the findings and
recommendations of the recently
established task force under LTA's
purview.
Some Singaporeans think that when we ask
questions, we are trying to embarrass
the government. The Workers Party does
not see it that way. Checking the
government is a function of system
design. This is something our early
leaders understood and is an essential
feature of the Westminster system we
adopted from the British. To borrow an
old tech phrase, questioning the
government in parliament is a feature,
not a bug. Embracing this feature will
be an important priority for the workers
party in this term of parliament. Where
alternative proposals and improvements
to existing policies need to be raised,
we will raise them accordingly.
If our fellow Singaporeans, workers and
pats wish to suggest matters for us to
raise in this house, please contact us.
We welcome inputs which are backed by
evidence. We also welcome organizations
includingmemes and corporates to engage
with us with a view towards better
policies for our economy and our people.
We believe that the prospect of the
opposition raising issues in parliament
has a strong nudging effect in getting
the issues recognized and addressed by
the government. We thank all parties for
their good faith engagement most
recently over the issues faced by
platform workers. On this I have filed a
parliamentary question to delve more
deeply into this issue.
All Singaporeans are collectively
interested in the betterment of our
people. engagement with the opposition
and the workers party in particular
reflects a society that treasures,
supports, and makes effective use of a
balanced political system. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank all
voters who supported the Workers Party
at the last general elections,
regardless of constituency.
A Singapore that understands that it is
both government MPs and opposition MPs
who contribute to make Singapore worth
fighting for put Singapore on a stronger
footing for the challenges to come.
Mr. Speaker, a united society is however
ultimately rooted in justice and
fairness. The individual must feel a
sense of belonging to Singapore and an
affinity to the community around him or
her.
This brings me to the president's call
to put we before me. The theme I beg
your pardon. This is a theme that
continues from the prime minister's
national day rally.
It is a simple idea but a timeless one
too.
Singapore has wrestled with the ambit of
such communitarian concepts in the past,
but one can understand the significance
of reiterating this call in light of
present times.
In the late 1980s, the government
introduced what was originally referred
to as a national ideology with the
purpose of gradually developing a
national identity. This led to the
government white paper on shared values
listing five propositions of what these
shared values ought to be. The white
paper on shared values was subject to
intense debate over two days in this
house. Former speaker Abdullah Tamuji
argued that two values, first nation
before community and society above
self and second regard for regard and
community support for the individual
slanted too heavily towards society and
community with not enough premium placed
on the individual. He said, and I quote,
"People are afraid that these values
would lead to a stifling of the
individual, while individualism per se
is not a good value to promote.
Overemphasis on the community could lead
to a stifling of innovation and
creativity and hence reduce our
competitiveness. The line between the
two has to be carefully drawn."
Another PAP MP, Dr. Chuch Chung shared
that the most problematic of all values
appeared to be consensus instead of
contention as there was a fear or
suspicion that the government would use
this call for consensus to browbeat
critics, stifle creativity
and muzzle opponents.
Yet another PAPMP asserted that his
conversations with students, grassroot
leaders, and business colleagues gave
him, and I quote, the distinct
impression that many people scoff at the
idea of a paper on shared values. Most
of these things are obvious, they say.
Is it necessary for the government to
push yet another load of sanctimonyy
down our throat?
The public reaction and the qualified
cynicism aside, the vision of the white
paper itself was not objectionable.
Despite references to Singapore as an
Asian society, the white paper
acknowledged that not everything Asian
was good and not everything western was
bad.
The senior minister of state, Dr.
soon sought to clarify that the
government neither wanted and I quote
blind conformity and compliance in the
name of nation or of consensus
which he alluded to as a disease that I
quote is not unknown in the east and
that tyranny of the majority may be even
worse than individualism.
He argued that shared values must never
be an excuse to stamp out individual
ideas and aspirations that can lead to
new achievements. His view was that we
must always encourage individual
excellence.
Are the shared values important today?
I believe there is a wisdom to them
because they forement and advance a
unifying ethos and there is evidence
that many of us care deeply about what
it means to be Singaporean.
In June 2020, the government published
some information on the Singapore
Together emerging stronger conversation.
That was a conversation series on
Singapore's CO9 experience and
Singaporeans's aspirations for a more
resilient postcoid9 society.
At the time, I filed a parliamentary
question seeking details about the
feedback given by about 17,000
Singaporeans
from those conversations.
In our political system, where it is
sometimes assumed that the proverbial
breadandut issues would dominate,
one might have thought that the topic of
jobs and the economy and separately
digitalization and technology
would rank highest among the topics
discussed.
However, what ranked at the top were
national identity and shared values and
social support.
The issues encompassed under national
identity and shared values included
protecting our vulnerable, support for
volunteerism
and how we might build a more
compassionate and cohesive society.
So, it is clear that the idea of we is
important to Singaporeans. But I would
assert that it is certainly it certainly
does not mean suppressing or minifying
the importance and central role of the
individual and his or her place in
Singapore.
And I would instead argue that we and me
are perspectives that exist on a
continuum. Both we and me matter to
Singaporeans. A binary treatment is
limiting while an overemphasis on one is
not consistent with our lived
experiences.
We should aim for excellence as
individuals and venture forth with
confidence as individuals and be
respected by society as individuals
regardless of race, language, religion,
and backgrounds.
At the same time, an awareness of we
beyond our comfort zone opens
opportunities for us not just to be
better,
but to be the best version of ourselves.
A sense of personal fulfillment and
purpose are more likely achieved when we
contribute to something larger than
ourselves and aim beyond self-enrichment
and personal outcomes.
Perhaps the most important point to be
made here is that Singaporeans are well
and truly in the driver's seat of
shaping the Singapore they wish to see.
While Singaporeans may struggle today to
list the five shared values of 1991,
as naturally as they say the pledge or
the national anthem, the importance of
living harmoniously in a multi-racial
and multi-religious society is not lost
on many.
Increasingly, however, there is a sense
that being a member of a racial or and
religious group on the one hand and our
identity as Singaporeans
are both equally important.
For some, like myself and those of my
generation, being Singaporean and a part
of the country and something larger
edges in importance compared to one's
cultural rootedness and a sense of
loyalty to our individual communities.
For some younger people, the Singapore
identity can be said to have even
transcended race.
The former chief of government
communications was recently quoted in a
podcast as saying that his younger
colleagues did not make much of the fact
that the squadron commander who led the
fly pass at this year's National Day
parade was Malay.
I would suggest that this shows that for
a younger generation of Singaporeans, at
least some Singaporeans,
a democratic society based on justice
and equality
ought not to be declared just in words,
but must be manifested in deeds.
It may well have it may well be that the
aspiration of the pledge has morphed, at
least for some, into an expectation.
We should acknowledge and even celebrate
such expectations as the ultimate
reflection of a more united people than
ever before. It portends a bright future
for Singapore.
At the same time, we must be aware that
our multi-racial reality can be a soft
underbelly that malicious actors may
exploit to divide us. Hybrid conflicts
are already a reality and we can see how
misinformation and disin disinformation
especially online have been employed by
some to fuel narratives that divide
communities
in speech be it online or offline. It is
easy to bully and intimidate others with
rank, popularity, and labels.
And by punching down at those who may
not have the full facts or see the world
differently.
It is much harder to take on someone
your own size
or bigger or engage an issue
respectfully regardless of the
counterparty.
But we should all choose the more
difficult path of empathy and mutual
respect. Even if we agree to disagree
in Singapore, we must actively fight the
tendency to think tribally on a
day-to-day basis. As we negotiate the
day the way forward, let us remember to
treat each other as equals. We must
persevere and work on this as a
responsibility of each generation and
leave a better Singapore behind for the
next generation.
This is even as we hold dear and
celebrate our individual mother tongues,
traditions, religions, and cultures. We
do this in an English-speaking
environment, one that goes a long way to
create an accessible and welcoming
global city for trade and investment,
and an accessible and expansive public
space for all Singaporeans.
If we succeed in building on this
foundation,
we will not just shine, but survive and
thrive well beyond SG60.
To conclude, sir, Singaporeans should be
proud of our diversity, including our
political diversity, and yet be united
as one people. The Workers Party will
continue to play its part. On behalf of
the Workers Party MPs, I wish the
government and all civil servants well
in this term of Parliament. We look
forward to serving as the loyal
opposition for all Singaporeans and
working for Singapore. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
Order. We've been in the chambers for
close to 5 hours. I propose to take a
break now and I'll suspend the sitting
and we'll take the chair at
4:45
p.m. Order. Order.
order. Resumption
of debate on a motion on president's
address. President's speech address of
thanks.
Minister Mi Mr. Chiang.
>> Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker.
I thank the government in the 14th term
of parliament and partite partners for
their strong support to the labor
movement. Because of our collective
efforts, many workers including PMEs
have seen real improvements in wages,
welfare and work prospects. Amidst
rising cost of living, many workers
amidst rising cost of living, we raised
our lower wage workers income, platform
workers, now CPF, workplace injury
compensation and the right to be
represented by platform workers
associations.
Workplace fairness has also been
strengthened so that all workers,
especially our mature PMEs, are assured
of a level playing field. We provided
new support for our involuntarily
unemployed workers and supported our
caregivers flexible flexible work
arrangement requests.
Senior workers now have a longer runway
should they choose to do so to work. The
labor movement also catalyzed business
and workforce transformation through
more than 3,600 company training
committees promoting win-win outcomes
for businesses and workers at the same
time. But Mr. Speaker, beyond policies
and numbers, what mattered most really
is the impact on ordinary people and
workers. Amidst the rising cost of
living, every wage increase,
every new protection, and every training
scheme made a real difference. Families,
workers were able to be better provided
for.
This is why I'm in the house today to
ensure that every Singaporean worker and
family can face the future with
confidence.
Sir, as we step into this new term of
parliament, Singapore faces significant
external and internal challenges.
Externally, the world is more fractured.
Trade wars, tech wars, hot wars are red
are redefining the rule-based order that
Singapore has long depended on. And
technologies like artificial
intelligence are reshaping how we live,
learn, and work faster than many of us
can keep up with. Internally, the
realities of becoming a super aged
society will hit us. More of our workers
will be older and more families will
experience more strain from caregiving
responsibilities.
During my block visits in Jalank Caillou
and in many conversations with with
workers at union events and community
gatherings, I've heard the anxieties of
our people. Young graduates worry if
they will be able to find good jobs.
Mid-career and older PMEs fear being
displaced by AI and economic
restructuring.
Families struggle with the pressures of
caregiving, wondering how they can cope
with the financial, physical, and
emotional strains.
These are not abstract concerns. They
are the daily worries of ordinary
Singaporeans trying to secure a better
future for themselves and the loved
ones.
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the labor movement
supports the direction laid out by our
president to transform our economy
amidst AI disruption while ensuring that
no Singaporean is left to journey alone.
To achieve this, the labor movement
calls on the government to work with
trapite partners on three fronts. One,
ensure good jobs for every generation so
young graduates can start well and adapt
and have opportunities to grow.
Mid-career workers and PMEs can adapt
and seize new opportunities and older
workers can continue contributing with
dignity.
two, uplift our vulnerable low-wage
workers, platform workers, and
freelancers by ensuring fair earnings
and dignified work.
And three, stronger support for our
caregivers so no Singaporean has to
choose between caring for their loved
ones and keeping their job. My fellow
Labor MPs and I will outline the
priorities of the labor movement to
advance on these fronts. I will focus my
address on two areas today. Ensuring
good jobs amidst AI disruption and
better support for caregivers. Let me
first speak about AI disruption. AI has
great economic potential for Singapore.
It can boost productivity and help
businesses stay competitive.
On the flip side, I know many workers,
including PMEs, see AI as a threat. Big
companies such as Amazon and Microsoft
are cutting jobs. Drivers worry about
being displaced and replaced by
autonomous vehicles. They don't know
what AI mean for them and their jobs. I
fully understand these concerns. It can
be daunting not knowing what to expect
and perhaps worse how to keep up.
They say, "I know AI is here, but secen
I don't know what to do." This is why we
must do more to equip our workers to
meet AI disruption head on. Bring the
right tools and knowhow to the
businesses and our workers so that they
can take proactive steps to seize
AIdriven opportunities.
To this end, NTOC stands ready to
support the national AI strategy. We
want to work with the government and
trump entropotype partners to put forth
a national AI adoption and training
initiative. I'll call this initiative AI
ready SG as a working name. It will
serve as a one-stop platform to
integrate existing resources from
government and tropite partners so
businesses and workers can truly be AI
ready. Through AI Ready SG, workers can
access dedicated resources for
upskilling and navigate career
transitions. Employers can tap into
resources to embark on practical AI
transformation.
The AISG, the AI ready SG initiative can
ride on the company training committee
ecosystem to support AI transformation.
And this goes in part in answering some
colleagues earlier speeches about
converging business interests and
marrying it to workers interests.
Businesses get to figure out what AI
means to them, chart out their
transformation road map and implement
projects that deliver real productivity
gains. At the same time, workers,
including PMEs, can better map out their
AI skills, upgrading pathways, boosting
their job security and works prospects
along their company's business
transformation.
In fact, NTC and employers have started
using the CTC model to catalyze AI
transformation.
Take BSL Unifi uh m manufacturing
services company for example. Through
the CTC they embarked on a companywide
digital transformation program and
implemented an AI powered service
portal. Previously, customer service and
operations staff relied on Excel sheets
to laborously manually track inventory
and manage
inquiries.
Today, the portal has saved BSF Unifi
more than 2,500 man hours per year with
a 40% efficiency improvement through
streamlined processes and smart data
management.
staff workers receive a money skills
allowance of $150 to encourage and
enhance their AI skills. So, a true
win-win for both business transformation
and workers outcome. This is just one
example of how AI ready SG can help
companies move up the value chain and
bring workers including PMEs along. The
CTC's power these efforts. As of July
this year, we have committed more than
$7.4 million in CC in CTC grants to AI
related projects, which is about 11% of
the total number of CTC projects.
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let us take heat of
the president's call. For businesses, AI
must mean better business. for workers,
including PMEs. AI upskilling must mean
better jobs, better wages, and better
work prospects. If we can do this, we'll
be able to exploit AI to transform our
economy and better Singaporean lives.
Let me now turn to caregiving. I thank
the government and tropite partners for
measures like enhanced paternity and
shared parental leave. Yet many workers
still struggle with the dayto-day
reality of caregiving.
Balancing a job or tending to the needs
of a sick elderly parent, a child or
adult with special needs can be
exhausting.
It is not just about managing the time.
is about the stress, the sleepless
nights, and the emotional weight that
caregivers carry every single day.
I recently met Mr. Go, a 45 yearear-old
freelancer and beneficiary of NTU's UK
fund. He and his wife are both working
and they have four children,
two of which are special needs and one
child requires roundthe-clock care.
He shared and is grateful that while
subsidies help, he worries about medical
expenses chipping away at their family
savings.
What troubles him most is not just about
today's struggle, but the future. Will
his children be able to cope when he and
his wife can no longer take care of
them? Will they themselves be able to
retire with dignity?
More than anything, he hopes that
families like his won't be left to carry
the heavy load of care alone.
His story is not unique. During my house
visits in Jalanka, caregivers shared
with me some of the same worries. How to
juggle work and caregiving and the
stress and the mental toll it takes on
them. We must do more to support
caregivers to take care of themselves
and their loved ones. Sir, let us not
stop at empathizing with caregivers like
Mr. Go. We must do more to strengthen
the caregiver support in these areas.
First, help caregivers stay in work.
Having a job is essential for long-term
financial resilience. We must expand the
flexible work arrangements and enshrine
caregiving leave making them more
widespread,
accessible, and importantly stigmaree.
Second, help caregivers who have left
work return to work. We must redouble
our efforts on back to work programs to
ease their transition, especially for
those who have stepped off work for
prolonged periods of time. We must
better design and enhance our existing
schemes to bridge skills gaps, find
suitable job opportunities, provide
perhaps mentorship, and give employer
incentives to hire returning caregivers.
Third, strengthen the ecosystem of care.
We must make bold moves to ensure that
care support for elderly and disabled
loved ones is available, affordable, and
accessible.
While we are moving in the right
direction, we must be prepared to review
our policies to better support our
caregivers. This includes reviewing
medicine limits and caregiving subsidies
to defay costs. Provide CPF topups for
primary caregivers with insufficient
retirement adequacy. Enhancing community
care services including for persons with
special needs, persons with mental
health conditions, and more and more
with dementia.
and importantly strengthening care
coordination so families don't have to
struggle to navigate the generous but
multiple schemes across different
agencies not knowing what to do.
So many of us are caregivers currently
or will be at some point. Let us take
bold steps to ensure that Singaporeans
have the support they need to care for
their loved ones while staying resilient
at work and at home. Mandream, please.
The AI
for
the woman.
Fore!
Foreign! Foreign!
Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me conclude.
Sir, I'm deeply honored and privileged
to return to this house. I enter this
house on a narrow margin, but I will
serve with full conviction
because I stand to be the voice for
workers
fighting for better jobs, better lives,
and a brighter future for all.
To the voters in Jalanka, thank you for
your trust you have placed on me. I will
honor it and I will serve you to the
best of my abilities.
Mr. Speaker, as Singapore confronts
accelerating AI disruption and rising
caregiver demands, let us all in this
parliament keep faith with the workers,
caregivers and their families who want a
chance at a better life.
Together, let us build a Singapore where
every worker can succeed at work, where
every family can thrive, and where every
Singapore,
for every Singaporean can journey
forward with hope and dignity
for every worker, for every family, for
Singapore. Thank you,
>> Deputy Prime Minister Kim Yong.
>> Mr. Speaker, thank you for allowing me
to speak and to uh join in the debate
for the to thank the president. So over
the last six decades, Singapore has
built a strong and dynamic economy
driven by global enterprises, homegrown
champions, and an ecosystem on of small
and medium enterprises.
This has in turn created good jobs,
lifted real wages, and raised the
standard of living of Singaporeans. Our
success has been built on solid
fundamentals, sustained investments in
infrastructure, extensive global
connectivity, a skilled workforce, and a
pro business environment.
Just as importantly, being a small and
open economy, we have benefited from an
from an open rules-based multilateral
trading system. This has enabled
companies here to participate in global
supply chains and benefit from global
economic growth as well as establish
Singapore as a hub for goods, services,
capital and talent.
But we are now facing three fundamental
challenges. In many parts of the world,
countries are turning inwards, erecting
barriers to trade and investment and
prioritizing economic security and
national interest. The rapid
acceleration of technological
advancements such as AI will disrupt
industries and jobs. Last but not least,
our resource constraints such as land,
carbon, manpower will become
increasingly binding.
However, amidst these challenges and
difficulties, there are opportunities
and new possibilities.
Companies around the world are looking
to diversify their production bases and
supply chains in response to the
evolving global economic landscape. This
will create new opportunities for us to
capture new investments and enter new
markets. Our region has a strong growth
potential. It has a young population, a
rising middle class and good physical
and digital connectivity and is poised
to be one of the fastest growing regions
in the world.
Technology
while may disrupt industries and jobs
can also open up frontiers, new
frontiers for research and innovation
and drive the creation of new products
and services and even new industries.
Similarly, the lowcarbon transition will
catalyze the growth of the green economy
such as green manufacturing, clean
energy, carbon services and trading and
sustainable finance. Five months ago, we
had set up the e Singapore economic
resilience task force to support firms
and workers in navigating the immediate
headwinds as well as to refresh our
longerterm economic blueprint so that we
can secure our place in the e new
economic order.
While there is now greater certainty,
greater clarity over the tariff rates
that the US has imposed on many of its
key trading partners, significant
uncertainties remain. Negotiations with
several countries including China and
India are still ongoing. Details on how
the deals will be implemented remain
unclear. And in fact, we have already
seen a number of conflicting
interpretations emerge.
The US has hinted at further sectoral
tariffs such as on semiconductors and
pharmaceuticals and these are eminent.
I just want to take this opportunity to
clarify that uh the these two sectors
contribute about 7% of our GDP not 40%
as Mr. Pam Singh pointed out but I
should say that even at 7% they are
significant and the full impact of these
terrorists will take time to flow
through in the months and years ahead.
The SE will continue to monitor the
developments and assess the impact of
the tariffs on our businesses and our
workers.
Our current support measures, including
those announced at this year's budget
and committee of supply, are still
relevant and helpful. These include
extensions and enhancements to the
double tax deduction for
internationalization,
the market readiness assistance grant as
well as the enterprise financing
schemes.
We have also announced that we will roll
out the business adaptation grants from
next month to help companies impacted by
the tariffs to adapt their business
operations and strengthen their supply
chain resilience.
We will also support our workers to help
them to help our job seekers better
identify suitable job opportunities. We
have stepped up our career advisory and
guidance services including through NTU
and E2I.
We will roll up the graduate industry
training ships program from next month
to help fresh graduates gain industry
experience and skills which will
facilitate their transition into
full-time employment.
We are prepared to do more for our
companies and our workers if necessary.
The global developments we have seen
over the past few months are not a
passing storm. It is a new mo it instead
they point towards a change world, a new
norm that is more fragmented with
sharper competition for investments and
a shift towards economic security and
national interest. These call for a new
economic blueprint to steer Singap
Singapore forward in this changed world
and that is why we embarked on the
economic strategy review the ESR. The
ESR is consulting and engaging
stakeholders and will submit its
recommendations next year. I will not
want to preempt their conclusions at
this point but let me just talk broadly
about our approach. First, we must
strengthen our position in existing
growth sectors and establish a strong
foothold in the new sectors of growth.
As pointed out by Mr. Cher Taha,
our one existing growth area is advanced
manufacturing. Over the decades, we have
established Singapore as a global node
in key sectors such as semiconductors,
healthcare, specialty chemicals, and
aerospace.
I attended the opening of the ST
Engineering's new engine MRO facility
last week. And in addition to ST
Engineering, we are also a key aerospace
manufacturing and MRO site for leading
firms such as SIA Engineering, GE
Aerospace, Rolls-Royce, and Collins
Aerospace.
Singapore accounts for 10% of the global
output for maintenance, repair and
overhaul MRO market and close to 20% of
the global market share in engine MRO.
We are supporting companies to build new
repair and process development
capabilities, deploy robotics and
automation solutions and conduct conduct
R&D in AI, additive repairs and
electrification technologies.
These moves will strengthen Singapore's
positioning as Asia's leading aerospace
hub and a critical node in the global
supply chains.
We have also established a position as a
leading services hub such as in
commodity trading, digital industries,
tourism, financial services and
professional services. We will build on
this foundation to further reinforce
Singapore, our status as a services hub
for the region, especially with a fast
growing digital economy.
We must also position ourselves well to
establish a strong early foothold in new
growth sectors. One such areas is in
precision medicine which is projected to
grow at an average of 11% annually to
reach a size of $300 billion globally by
2035.
Our strength as a leading biomedical
sciences hub put us in the good position
to capture opportunities in the research
development and commercialization of
life science tools, diagnostic testing
and therapeutics in this rapidly growing
sector.
In addition to precision med medicine,
we are also exploring other potential
growth areas such as AI and deep tech,
green economy, autonom autonomous
vehicles and space.
Second, we will make Singapore a home
for leading firms. We will reinforce the
presence of today's industry leaders and
mature companies with the potential to
become future industry leaders. We have
established a strong base of industry
leaders in key sectors. We will work
with them to further grow their
businesses and anchor new high value
added activities here in Singapore.
For example, in the healthcare sector,
eight out of the top 10 biofarmaceutical
companies have established their
manufacturing sites or R&D activities
here. and seven out of the 10 top life
sciences tools companies have
significant R&D and manufacturing
activities in Singapore. This has
enabled us to be among the top global
manufacturing sites for high value
manufacturing instruments and
consumables.
We will partner these industry leaders
to establish best-in-class manufacturing
facilities, R&D activities, develop new
capabilities such as AI, and expand
their product range.
Many Singapore enterprises are also
industry leaders in their respective
sectors and we will support them to
deepen their capabilities and help them
to expand overseas. One example is Sam
Core. To date, the company has has
established a total capacity in
renewable energy generation of close to
18 gawatt overseas in countries such as
China, India, and Vietnam. This is an
example of how our Singapore companies
are tapping into growth opportunities
overseas. By growing in overseas
markets, these companies will become
bigger and stronger to support the value
creation, innovation, and HU functions
here in Singapore.
This will also reinforce our status as a
hub for globally competitive firms.
There are companies which may not be big
and which may be small today but have
the potential to become future industry
leaders and we will seek them out and
anchor them in Singapore so that they
may be new engines of growth for our
economy in time to come. One such
category of companies are startups.
Empic Micro is a good example. Empic
manufacturers manufactures ultra low
power processors that consume onetenth
of the power compared to their
competitors. Their technology can be
found in smart watches and was used to
power the trace together token during co
first established their presence in
Singapore in 2021
and have since grown and successfully
listed to support their inter
international growth. The company has
established their regional headquarters
and R&D activities here in Singapore and
we hope to further anchor their presence
in Singapore. At the same time, we will
study how we can better support our
local startups and entrepreneurs from
initial stages to scale up and growth.
This could include access to growth
capital, space, and infrastructural
needs and partnerships in overseas
markets.
One example is Alena. Alena is a space
tech startup that develops electric
propulsion systems
which enables small satellites to fly
closer to Earth for higher quality data
collection.
With support from Enterprise SG's Global
Innovation Alliance, GIA, Aliana worked
with partners in the United Kingdom, to
develop a technology that uses water
electrolysis for electric propulsion
systems.
These collaborations enable Elena to
expand its customer base and
operationalize
their footprint. And the company has
seen a more than 300% year-on-year
increase in revenue last year.
Third, we will strengthen our
fundamentals to stay competitive. Let me
highlight three key fundamentals. One,
our capacity to deploy and diffuse new
technologies.
Each new wave of technology from
computerization, the internet and now
the AI has shown that it is not just the
technological breakthroughs themselves
but the ability and speed at which we
can deploy and diffuse them effectively
across the economy that determines
whether we can sustain our
competitiveness.
We must therefore be a nation of both
innovators and fast adopters. Take AI
for example. We have made good progress
in accelerating AIdriven innovation
through the establishment of AI centers
of excellence.
At the same time, we must complement
this by broadening and deepening AI
adoption across a broad base of
enterprises
includingmemes.
We will develop AI playbooks and
toolkits to guide companies in adopting
AIdriven solutions as well as raise the
AI fluency among both technical
professional and nontechnical
professionals.
Two, our skilled workforce. The quality
of our human capital has been a key
competitive advantage for Singapore. As
we transform our economy towards higher
value added activities, we must also
ensure that our upskilling and
reskilling efforts keep pace. We must
empower workers with new skills for the
future, including being AI fluent or
remain so as to remain relevant.
Similarly, we want our workers to gain
overseas work experience and exposure.
This will position them well to take on
regional and global leadership roles in
future.
We must also stay open to global talent
so that we may tap on their strengths to
complement our resident workforce. This
is critical to ensure that our
industries and firms stay globally
competitive.
Three, careful and long-term planning.
Our years of investments in our port and
airport infrastructure have been
critical to Singapore's excellent
connectivity today, which underpins our
role as a regional hub. Similarly, we
must plan for the energy transition and
help our businesses transition to a
sustainable future. This is why we are
pursuing multiple pathways to
decarbonize our energy mix. We are
ramping up our domestic solar
deployment, facilitating lowcarbon
electricity imports, and building
capabilities in emerging lowcarbon
alternatives such as hydrogen and
nuclear energy. We will calibrate the
pace of the transition carefully. Even
as we decarbonize, we must ensure that
Singapore stays cost competitive and our
energy security is safeguarded.
Even as we secure our long-term growth,
we have not lose sight lost sight of the
challenges that some of our thememes are
facing, including those in the retail
and FMB sectors as well as our heartland
enterprises.
This is because of a variety of factors,
including more intense competition from
e-commerce players, shifts in consumer
preferences, and rising costs. We have
rolled out several initiatives to
support such businesses.
For example, those in the FNB can tap on
enterprise S Jesus F foot X program and
Hutland Enterprises can tap on the
enhanced visual merchandising program
and the Hutland Enterprise placemaking
grant to revamp their storefront to
drive more business.
Our CDC vouchers and SG60 vouchers will
also encourage consumers to spend in the
at the Heartland Enterprises.
We will help thesememes raise their
productivity, restructure their
operations and rejuvenate their
business.
I mentioned earlier that despite the
challenges ahead, there are
opportunities for Singapore to grow our
economy.
We expect to grow at about 2 to 3%
peranom over the next decade on average.
This is comparable to many other small
advanced economies such as New Zealand,
Switzerland and Sweden.
But we should not take that as a given.
Instead, we should try to aim higher,
take advantage of the window of
opportunities over the next few years to
achieve a faster rate of growth if we
can before we settle down to 2 to 3%
trend over the long term.
But this will not be easy. Our foreign
worker policy has remained unchanged. We
expect our workforce to grow just about
1% peranom over the next decade given
our aging workforce and falling birth
rates. We also expect our productivity
to grow by about 1 to 2% peranom over
the next decade. And this is already
challenging judging by the historical
experience of economies with similar
size and the level of development. There
will also be times when the global
economy will slow down and our growth
will also slow down. Consequently
and therefore that will bring us to
between 2 to 3% uh perm. However, we see
opportunities to get a larger
productivity lift from technology such
as AI, robotics as well as automation.
We will also grow other higher value
added industries as I've outlined above
uh before. And if we do it right, we may
be able to add 1% and achieve 3 to 4%
growth instead of 2 to 3%. And in very
good years, maybe even more.
I spoke earlier about how Singapore's
success has been closely intertwined
with an open rules-based multilateral
trading system. Trade is important.
Trade is three times our GDP. Singapore
pursues an active trade strategy through
our free trade agreements and other
platforms.
These FTAs have opened doors for our
companies to access new markets,
diversify supply chains, and build
deeper economic partnerships around the
world. Our network of FTAs also makes us
an attractive destination for foreign
investments and has enabled us to build
a resilient economy and provides that
provides for good jobs for our people.
We must double down on our efforts to
preserve and expand our international
economic space.
Bilaterally, we will deepen our
cooperation and integration with our key
economic partners. Both the US and China
remain our key economic partners. The US
is our largest foreign investor and
China is our largest goods trading
partner. While competition between the
US and China has intensified, we must
continue to work with both US and China
in areas of mutual interest and mutual
benefits.
India is another economy that is poised
to grow strongly in the years ahead.
Earlier this month, we launched the road
map for the comprehensive strategic
partnership between India and Singapore,
outlining areas such as semiconductors,
industrial parks and capital market
connectivity where both countries could
strengthen economic cooperation
beyond India. We are deepening our
economic cooperation with other key
economies such such as Australia, the
EU, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Saudi
Arabia, and the UAE. And the list goes
on. Closer to home, we are also
deepening our economic cooperation with
our immediate neighbors, including in
Joo through the Jaw Singapore special
economic zone and in Batam Bintan
Karimun BBK. And we are further
exploring how the three of us can work
together for even stronger synergies.
Regionally, we are working within ASEAN
to deepen our regional integration as
well as to broaden our cooperation with
other external partners. We have
recently concluded a negotiation to
upgrade the ASEAN trading goods
agreement and we are making good
progress towards substantial conclusion
on the ASEAN digital e economy framework
agreement later this year.
ASEAN is working with G cooperation
council GCC to enhance trade and
investment flows and also working to
establish a dialogue with the EU and
with the CPTP.
And last week, Singapore together with
13 other small, medium, and trade
dependent economies launched the future
of investment and trade partnership. The
FIT partnership is an informal group
that will champion a forward-looking
trade agenda and work together on areas
such as supply chain resilience,
investment facilitation, non-tariff
barriers, and trade facilitation as well
as leveraging on technology.
These examples illustrate how Singapore
will continue to broaden its network of
economic partnerships, including in
areas like digital economy and green
economy. And by doing so, we will open
up more opportunities for our
businesses, diversify our markets, and
strengthen our resilience in an
increasingly fragmented world.
These efforts will also strengthen the
rules-based trading system.
The World Trade Organization, WTO, is
not perfect, but remains an important
foundation on which to build a better
global rules-based trade architecture.
For sure, the WTO needs to be reformed
to stay relevant and effective. And we
will work with like-minded partners to
reform and modernize the WTO and
reinforce an open, fair, rules-based
multilateral trading system so that
small trade dependent economies like
Singapore can continue to thrive in a
global economy.
Mr. Mr. Speaker, Singapore's economic
journey has never been an easy one. With
limited land, manpower, and natural
resources, we have to work harder and
plan longer, further ahead and move
faster than others. We can take heart at
the success we have achieved over the
past six decades, but we cannot afford
to be complacent.
To secure our future in a changed world,
we must stay globally competitive by
building strong industries, anchoring
leading firms here, grow our own
enterprises, strengthening our capacity
to embrace technology, investing in our
workforce, and finding ways to overcome
our resource constraints.
We must also continue to expand our
international economic space by
strengthening our network of trade and
investment, reinforcing a rules-based
global trading system, and positioning
Singapore as a trusted hub in a more
uncertain and turbulent world.
Our circumstances may be challenging,
but our foundations are strong. Together
with determination and imagination, we
can continue to grow our economy, create
good opportunities for our people, and
build a better and brighter future for
Singapore and Singaporeans. Thank you.
>> Miss her Ting Ru, leader of the
opposition, you want a clarification of
the DPM?
>> Uh, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It's
just a clarification on my speech where
I should have said that the broad
sectoral tariffs would hurt demand for
Singaporean products including
semiconductors, consumer electronics and
pharmaceutical goods which account for
40% of exports to the US. I thank the
DPM for making the correcting my speech
where uh and stating that uh farmer and
semiconductors contribute 7% of our GDP.
Thank you. So just to confirm you're
clarifying your own speech, not the
DPMs, right?
Uh Miss Hurting Room,
[Music]
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over four months
have flown by since the general
elections, and it feels like we have
since lived a lifetime. Our journey in
Sang Kong started in 2020 and the next
five years went by like a roller
coaster. We were carried through ups and
downs in no small part due to those who
stood by us and who were our rocks as we
were tossed around by turbulence.
Through this, our team of volunteers
showed up every day, week after week,
all doing their part to make sure that
we were able to carry on our work within
the community for our residents in Sang.
and for that we are deeply grateful.
These five years have crystallized how
being an elected member of parliament is
an incredible privilege and
responsibility afforded to us here in
this house. We saw joy and pride in the
eyes of parents sharing pictures of how
much their children have grown visiting
our MPS to show us with excitement their
children's educ.
We also sat with residents grieving
loved ones and other losses. Thank you
for sharing these precious moments with
us. We look forward to working alongside
you to deepen and continue the
relationship to work together to make
Sinkang and Singapore a better place for
all.
A theme that has played in my mind on
results night and ever since is the
power of us and not just the strength of
us but also the full spectrum of who we
are as a people, our resilience, our
skills and our values but also our
limitations, mistakes and flaws. And
instead of viewing these as opposite
sides of the coin, I have come to see
these as part of the richness of the
tapestry that comprises our towns, our
society, and our people. Compared with 5
years ago, the world has undergone many
changes. Even as memories fade of the
pains and coming together in the face of
co, we see living pressures continue to
mount. Global conflicts and the
straining of the previously accepted
world order add to concerns about
climate change. And it is no wonder that
there is so much talk about climate
anxiety, a mental health crisis. We are
also faced with ongoing challenges to
our own food security in Singapore and
how to forge forward to balance where
our country sits in a world where
sustainability challenges seem
insurmountable.
Additionally, when financial pressures
grow, community often takes the back
seat. Individuals, families, and social
relationships are put under strain.
physical and mental health declines,
civic engagement drops, and people
withdraw from social activities to save
money or because they feel ashamed. In
communities, social capital may be
weakened, diminishing community
resilience, risking a downward spiral
where vulnerable vulnerable groups end
up even more disproportionately affected
by weak economic winds. These are not
just abstract concepts. ask ourselves
compared with 5 years ago, are we a
stronger, kinder, more inclusive
society? In my maiden speech in 2020, I
talked about how I felt that the
perception of a lack of social mobility
and the presence of elitism, regardless
of data, is a real and often overlooked
danger. More than 5 years on, where are
we? This year, business and employment
sentiment surveys show dips, and many
expect these to remain depressed. How
are we fairing in terms of the
perception that our people have of our
much cherished system of meritocracy?
How often too have we over the last 5
years had fellow Singaporeans give us a
shrug and say what to do? Not because we
have given up, but because we feel
pressured up against forces that are
just so strong. So what have we done to
prevent this feeling of helplessness in
the face of global uncertainty and
challenge from taking root?
I believe that the answer to this is in
the power of community of a people
centered community. Human beings are
essentially social in nature relying on
one another for our well-being in a
world where scarcity starts to dominate.
It is where we have to band together to
make best use of whatever resources we
have to pull our strengths. Thus, I have
been deeply heartened that in the months
since our election in May this year, we
have been approached by numerous
organizations and individuals seeking to
partner us towards the betterment of our
community of our sink residents. This
deepening of the networks of our
community in Sang and beyond is
something we deeply appreciate. from
initiatives to create stronger
connections within a community to
befriend programs to better support
those in distress to fostering deep and
meaningful integration with those living
with disabilities and encouraging
residents to explore and engage more
with homebased businesses within their
community. These are some examples of
groups that have reached out to us. They
hoped that by working with the elected
members of parliament, the elected
counselors of the town council, they
could join us in ensuring that our
resources are maximized for the good of
our residents. These efforts may seem
small, particularly when compared
against huge movements or organizations
such as national level agencies like the
people's association.
However, they have given my party
colleagues and I invaluable insight and
a chance to explore these additional
facets of the community and to get to
know our people better as their elected
representatives. This will eventually
translate and inform our work as
legislators here in this house. They are
also an important acknowledgement that
the voice of our people matter, that
their collective choice to send my
colleagues and I into this house is
legitimate and accepted.
I also hope that this trickle will
eventually bring us to more
collaborations, more acceptance that
political diversity is important and
here to stay. Community partners should
eventually see us as nodes through which
we will help our communities overcome
challenges, fix problems, and grow
beyond their current limitations.
Ultimately, my hope is that this leads
to a shift towards working a working for
a country that is ultimately better able
to adapt to myriad challenges. And as I
have mentioned earlier, while knowing
our strengths is key, we also have to
sit with our limitations to truly see
our flaws candidly. This can be
discomforting, even raw and terrifying.
But this honesty and ability to sit with
our past and current shortcomings is how
we enable our growth as a country to
happen. So I believe that it is not just
about whether it is me first or we first
but us together.
We have spoken about the government's
plan evolution from me first to we first
here. The government has rightly like
any sensible government spoken about
national security, nimble economy and
increased assurance at every stage of
life. But what I hope to add is a
recognition of why me first as an
ideology emerged amidst the wider
formation of our nation. We have moved
from the first formal residence hundreds
of years ago to informal immigration
from the region and our merger and de
merger with Malaysia. I have noticed too
that me first is often said to be a
natural response to our highly
financialized and immigration centric
society and economy. Owning the fanciest
cars, getting the top MNC jobs, owning
freehole landed property as a means of
overcoming the constraints of the
country that we live in. Yet we are
always told that everything around us
will change. Everything is insecure. We
risk losing it all. And under this cloud
of scarcity, living out me first, it is
no wonder that we often see this
response as greed, selfishness, sharp
elbows, no care for the weak in the
society, no care for those without a
voice, no care for the planet we share.
Our response to this less an ideal state
is not to be anti-immigrant or anti-
capitalist particularly as our country
has been built off an environment that
is the opposite of that but as a first
response I hope we can once more look at
the dashboard of how to measure progress
which I spoke about during the last few
budgets. This measurement of outcomes
apart from GDP would help us to ensure
that some things in the public sphere
would not change so that we may find
alternative spheres of wealth rather
than just be guided by economical
thinking heritage should be kept alive
including our schools, community spaces,
natural spaces that we and our parents
went to. We should stem the erasia of
community heritage currently perceived
to be under threat from forces such as
rent and high operating costs. Our
non-physical cultures in the form of
languages, arts, hobbies need to be
supported as they are threatened by ME
first ideology. The first step to do
that is to start ways in which to
quantify these sources of wealth as I
have called for previously with the
developmental dashboard. It is thus very
exciting to learn more about initiatives
such as the collaboration between N US
and the SAQI Institute to explore using
Singapore and China as case studies a
new framework investigating in a new
framework integrating EESG principles
with inner development. The hope is that
this work can help governments design
systems rooted in sustainability,
dignity and shared purpose beyond GDP as
a measure of success.
The government also paints a tender
picture of a community where the
opposite of me first comprises citizens
who give up seats on trains taking
initiatives. But there are also things
which the government should not directly
try to affect. Using the analogy of a
garden, we should note the symbiotic
interactions between those living in it,
the harmony between micro micro fauna
and microfa down to tiny insects and the
essential interactions in the soil to
help a garden thrive.
As policy maker and enforcer of the law,
the government plays the role of a
gardener who occasionally pulls out
infestations, provides bigger plots, and
waters the plants during times of
drought. Having good intentions to prune
carefully and balance fertilizer and
pest control is essential, but not
enough. The government must also support
the garden to grow to allow it space to
breathe. We must have reliable physical
and intangible spaces within the garden
within the garden combined with
accessible ways of moving that allow
people to meet one another like the void
decks of old. How can we have a target
population for a garden when we haven't
made space for denisens to discover
themselves and grow? We must allow space
for some rewing. Stop worrying overly
about stop worrying overly about the
precise shape of our community. We must
trust that by removing barriers, the
inherent wisdom of a population with a
mindset of abundance will eventually
guide itself to an ever evolving system
that encourages us to flourish together.
Mr. Deputy Speaker in Chinese
Fore
speech.
Fore woman.
Fore! Foreign! Foreign!
for
woman.
finally the health of our governance
institutions as a reminder of what we
must do to set us on a path for an even
brighter tomorrow.
Singapore is safe, stable, and in many
ways successful. But as the saying goes,
past performance is not a guarantee of
future success. It is timely to ask if
we have the right governance processes
to safeguard these outcomes in the long
term. In a changing world, we keep
emphasizing the need for institutional
safeguards such as ombbitsmans, select
committees and trenching the
independence of the elections department
not to check a box or just because it is
an abstract concept we deem important.
We do so because these are real
important mechanisms for any nation to
ensure that its future stability and
gains are protected for many generations
to come. Institutional safeguards also
come in a form of oversight in the way
our public bodies and public service
operate. a clearer perceived neutrality
of institutions like the people's
association to ensure public resources
are not imshed with political goals even
in the way we allow the media and
independent voice voices to thrive
without the shadow of POFFMA overreach.
These are important foundational pillars
to ensure that the excesses of no
individual person or party can undo the
successes we are proud of and that we
will get policies right more often than
we will get them wrong. They are not
perfect but they are designed the
designed to hold back the worst excesses
even when politics get heated. We need
to ensure our guardrails are robust
while also working to hope our politics
never gets to that point of needing it.
Because no country, not even Singapore,
is immune to shocks, to mistakes, or to
excesses. And we must design processes
to ensure continuity and resilience. To
close, I also believe that the
government has a clear mandate with much
political capital to spare in order to
allow longerterm policies. But many
Singaporeans would join my party
colleagues and I in thinking that the
sign of a truly healthy health healthy
Singapore is one where the colors worn
by an elected member of parliament
should not matter when we work within
the community. I wish the new government
all the best and success for delivering
for Singapore because that is good for
all of us. For while we may disagree on
approaches, policies, implementation of
economic strategies, the one thing that
truly unites all of us here is the
staunch belief that we will see
Singapore succeed and that and for that
all of us here in this house should hold
our heads high as we work for the
betterment of Singapore, for the safety
and the future of those whom we love
more than love itself.
Thank you,
>> Acting Minister Jeffrey Siao.
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise in support of
the motion.
It's my honor to stand here for the
first time in this house and I want to
first thank the voters of Chachu Kang
GRC for the opportunity to represent
them in this 15th parliament.
Since joining politics, my life has
changed in different ways. I've learned
how to sleep less.
My daughter has observed that my eye
bags have their own eye bags. I have
less time to play football with my
friends on Sundays. And even when I do,
I'm the most polite of players. When I
get kicked on the back of the leg, I'm
the first to say sorry. Sorry.
Life is different now. But my family
keeps me going. So I wanted to start by
thanking all of them. My wife, my
brother, my kids, and my mother who even
comes to volunteer with me at my meet
the people sessions. My family makes me
feel that I am part of a team.
I have always believed in the power of a
team. In my public service career, I've
changed roles every 3 to five years. So,
and often I had to learn a new job from
scratch. And so, I could never assume I
had all the answers. And therefore, my
approach has always been to lean on the
strengths of those in my team. So, that
together we are more than the sum of the
individual
parts. And now, as a political leader,
my role is to make decisions on behalf
of our people. And my approach is to be
inclusive, to create space for voices to
be heard, and to build trust. And this
way, even issues that are divisive can
be opportunities to build bridges.
As transport minister, I have the chance
to put this philosophy into practice. As
you can expect, people give me feedback
all the time. And this is a privilege
because actually they're telling me
their stories and every story is
personal. The young couple who wants to
buy a car but finds it out of reach. A
single mother who uses her personal
mobility scooter to bring her three kids
to preschool even though she knows it's
legal. It's illegal. an office worker
who ran in the rain to catch a bus, but
she just missed it. And a father
splurging on the private hire car ride
so that he can get home in time to see
his children before they go to bed.
Hearing these stories, I understand why
some people feel that the system is
sometimes not working for them. They
feel the hard edge of a policy. They
feel that they're on the wrong side of
the line.
And I would solve every one of these
individual problems if I could because
these are not just matters of
efficiency. These are matters of
fairness and of dignity.
But in a compact country like ours,
transport needs necessarily collide.
Pedestrians and cyclists share the same
path. Cyclists and drivers share the
same road.
Everyone wants a bus stop just below
their homes. But no one wants a bus that
stops every 20 m.
In transport, tradeoffs are unavoidable.
And yet, they are felt deeply and
personally. And that is why it doesn't
just matter what we do. It matters how
we do it and how we bring people along.
And that is why my approach to policies
will be to explain our considerations
openly and honestly. What we give up,
what we gain and why. And here I found
that a personal touch really matters. It
really makes a difference. A face-toface
meeting, a phone call or a personal
email that I write myself, most
Singaporeans when I engage them this
way, they are reasonable and they are
fair even when they disagree with the
decision. Over time, I hope to win more
people's trust. I know trust is won over
time with consistency of action and
purpose. And I must show that our
processes are fair and my intentions are
right.
And so my approach is to be open and
transparent and thus I welcome the
leader of opposition, Mr. Priam Singh's
earlier comments about how the workers
party will scrutinize the work of the
MOT and the real reliability task force.
In fact, I will welcome questions from
all of us here in this chamber because
good questions are not the sole province
of the opposition but is the
responsibility of all of us. This
openness will help me build trust and
with trust the toughest compromises
become possible.
I've learned this lesson as a young
public officer. I was at the MOT earlier
working on the Cross Island line, a very
important MRT line, especially for the
northeast sector. On one side, engineers
and policy makers wanted a more the most
direct route to keep travel time short
and costs down. And the most direct
route was under the central catchman
nature reserve.
But nature groups feared that the soil
investigation drilling will harm the
fragile ecosystem of the nature reserve
and so they admire in opposition and
they pushed back. Arguments were heated,
the project was delayed. But the
important thing was both sides continued
to show up and this gave us the time to
hear each other out. In the end, nobody
got everything that they wanted, but
together we found better ways forward.
The LTA adopted more innovative and less
invasive methods, but most importantly,
we built trust. And as trust grew,
stronger solutions for Singapore
emerged. And I when I returned to the
MOT a few months ago, my nature group
combatants turned comrades were the
first to welcome me back as friends.
That experience has guided me since
then. The trust can be built even when
disagreements cut deep, but only if you
all commit to staying at the table with
the right heart and the right intent.
And that is the spirit I want to bring
to shape our transport future. In the
next few weeks, the Land Transport
Authority will launch consultations for
the next iteration of the land transport
master plan. We want to engage more
Singaporeans than ever before.
Commuters, drivers, cyclists, seniors,
persons with persons with disabilities,
mobility device users. We want to bring
all of them together to have deeper
conversations and to weigh trade-offs.
And my hope is simple. That more
Singaporeans feel that the system works
for them and that their story matters.
Building common ground helps us balance
today's needs, but it does not help us
solve tomorrow's problems. To ease the
pressure of zero sum choices, we must
create new ground, new choices, new
capacity, new options and possibilities.
For example, 15 years ago, we did not
have private hire cars. We only had
taxis.
The older ones amongst us will remember
that it was almost impossible to get a
taxi on a Friday night or on a rainy
day.
Then Uber and Grab arrived, and with
more cars and more flexible fairs, more
Singaporeans could access door-to-door
transport on a pay-per-use basis rather
than having to drive or to use or to
purchase a car. Initially, taxi drivers
feared that private hire cars would
undercut them, but in fact, both sets of
drivers benefited from more business and
higher earnings. If back then the
government had blocked the entry of Uber
and Grabbed, we would all have been
worse off. But we took the long-term
view and everyone benefited. And that is
why we are now looking to bring in
autonomous vehicles because AVs will add
a new option to move Singaporeans
around.
Imagine a safe ride home after a late
night out. Imagine a doorstep pickup to
the poly clinic for your medical
checkup. Imagine doing emails or listen
listening to a podcast in a car without
having to drive. Imagine new and
exciting jobs for Singaporeans,
especially our young. New possibilities
open up when we focus on creation rather
than division.
In sea and air transport, we have done
the same. We dreamt up possibilities
that didn't exist before, like the
world's largest automated port, like our
now iconic jewel. With TWAS ports and
Changi Terminal 5, we are again once
again building boldly, creating the
capacity for decades to come.
We are summoning the same spirits of
creation for economy.
DPM Gan spoke about the economic
strategy review. I co-chair the
committee on global competitiveness with
senior Minister of State Lan Ling. And
our committee comprises a new generation
of Singaporean business leaders who know
what it takes to survive and to thrive
in today's world. All of us share a deep
sense of urgency. We see how the world
may be moving against us. For decades,
Singapore has benefited from
globalization and free trade. But as the
president explained in his address and
as DPM explained in his speech, the
rules have shifted.
Larger economies are raising tariffs and
subsidizing their core industrial
champions. As a small country, we cannot
match them dollar for dollar, land for
land.
This is a big risk, but is also an
opportunity to retool, to move into
spaces where others hesitate to attract
new industries for Singapore and create
new jobs for Singaporeans.
And we've done this before. We joined up
seven islands to create Jurong Island to
build a prochemical hub. We invested in
semiconductors when others few others
believed that we could succeed. We grew
our biomedical industry from washing
test tubes to producing vaccines.
And we even built a worldclass
integrated resort on land reclaimed from
the sea.
These were not just about maintaining
the status quo. These were acts of
creation. And now it is time for us to
do it again. Our ambition is to be an
enterprise hub where companies are born,
grow and scale to the world to become
champions.
We will place bigger bets on the
industries of the future. Advanced
materials, robotics, precision medicine,
space.
These bets may feel uncomfortable.
Not everything will succeed. But if just
one, two, or three of these bets come
good, they will transform our economy
and carry Singapore to the next level.
Industries are only part of the story.
What matters most is whether
Singaporeans can step into these new
opportunities that we create. With a
faster change, with a faster pace of
economic change, people will have more
career transitions. Fewer people will
climb a single career ladder like I did,
almost did. Most of us will have
multiple jobs, move across many jobs and
industries across their lifetimes.
And career transitions can be unsettling
if faced alone.
But in Singapore, no one should feel
alone.
We only have 3.6 6 million Singaporeans.
And so we can help every person reskill
and reinvent themselves to unlock each p
person's potential again and again to
bring out the best in every one of us as
the world changes.
Of course, a career change can feel
daunting. It can feel emotional. It can
feel vulnerable. And in these moments, a
word of encouragement, a gesture of care
can make all the difference.
I've experienced this myself. When I
decided to join politics, I felt
unsettled, too. I was a civil servant
and I did not know how I would fare
under public scrutiny.
And politics was a whole new ball game.
In April, I had to make my first
political speech. I remember rehearsing
in the corner slightly nervous.
Then SM Tio Chihen walked by. We didn't
know each other very well before, but he
came over. He placed his hands on my
shoulder and he said, "As long as you
are doing the right thing, don't worry
about what other people say."
His words made all the difference to me
that day. It gave me the strength to
step forward and to speak like a lion.
To unlock the full potential of
Singaporeans, we must support one
another. We are one team. Encourage
others instead of criticizing them. When
friends and family try new things,
celebrate them. When they make mistakes,
help them. Treat others success as if
they were your own, our own. Because
when one of us rises, all of us rise
together.
Mr. Speaker, this is who I am. Someone
who believes in unity without
uniformity.
Someone who wants to create what has yet
to be imagined.
Someone who believes that we achieve
more when we work together.
At the heart of my team today is our
transport workers, rail maintenance
workers working in the dead of the
night. Our bus captains working split
shifts. Frontline customer service
officers who maintain their composure
even under public pressure.
Private hire car drivers trying to make
ends meet.
All of them are part of my team. I am
responsible for them. They keep our
system going and they will always have
my support and I hope they will have
yours too.
Not long ago, I read a letter that was
published in the
it was titled
Please return my father to me.
It was written by a young woman whose
father had been a bus captain for 20
years.
She wrote about the long hours that her
father worked, often on the hardest
shifts. When she asked him if work was
more important than family,
he replied, "The company needs me. I
have to do it."
At the end of her letter, she wrote,
"Family is the last bus in life that we
must never miss."
That story moved me. It reminded me of
my own relationship with my father. He
too worked long hours in a coffee shop.
Growing up, I wished for his presence,
even though I understood his absence.
Now I find myself feeling the same
tensions. Some evenings my children
would see me heading out. They would
ask, "Where are you going, daddy?" And I
wonder in those moments if I am giving
them enough.
They are teenagers now. They don't need
me to tuck them into bed anymore, but
they still need me to listen, to be
present, and to show up.
I feel a tinge in my heart, but I know
that my work matters. I'm helping to
build the country that we all share,
where people can get home on time for
dinner with their families, where a
daughter can see her bus captain, dad,
because we support the people that keep
our country running.
Our country will never be perfect, but
it can be one that we are all proud of.
And that is why I will keep going for
every Singaporean, for a Singapore where
no one walks alone.
The way forward is together with our
families, our friends, and as one nation
because the meaningful things in life
cannot be done alone. Thank you, Deputy
Speaker.
Mr. Kenneth Tong, you have a
clarification.
Thanks. Uh thank you DPM gun for your uh
statement. So I have three
clarifications for you. Uh so for first
you said there was a 5% above trend
growth scenario which is going to be
driven by high growth sectors. Uh what
is the composition of reskilled labor
and new labor input? uh if you have
those assumptions driving your model. My
second question is um you have there's
been increasing number of AI labs
setting up here uh mist uh Google. So I
understand that they have been accord uh
accorded incentives. What are the report
cards for these incentives accorded to
them? And the third question uh given
that both of you have mentioned space is
that I noticed there's no space agency
here. So, I'd like to ask you if that's
in the works.
>> Are those your three clarifications to
one of the ministers and and no more
clarifications? All right. Uh DPM Kim
Yong.
>> Thank you. Uh I thought that there's no
more clarification. I almost left.
Anyway, I I'm glad to have the the
questions. First let me explain that the
u potential high growth industries will
also involve the training and upskilling
of workers I mentioned in my speech and
this will involve um uh programs that
were put in place including skills
future program as well as a skill future
level up and exactly what skills we will
need is something that we'll have to
work through with the industries that
we're promoting when we bring in the
industries they will need new skills new
workers ers and uh existing workers have
to be upskilled, has to be retrained.
And this is something that we have to
also prepare uh ahead of time. So that
we as even as we uh negotiate and
discuss with new industries coming in,
we already will start talking about the
type of workers that they need, type of
skills that they need and some of the
industries that we bring in may be
already existing in Singapore. they may
be upgrading their uh production,
upgrading their operations, moving into
a higher value added um activities uh
and in that case they may also need to
upgrade their workers which are already
in their companies. So it's a
combination of new workers uh existing
workers upgrading new skills and this
will be a entire uh transformation uh
that we will need to go through and it
is part and parcel of our triparta
efforts that we work with companies work
with our trade unions our um um worker
representatives to see how we can
support their skills and upgrading and
and retraining uh journey. And you ask
about AI labs. Yes, we have set up quite
a lot of uh AI initiatives and uh they
are at different levels. First at the
broad level uh we would like to
encourage companies to embrace the AI
technology so that they are workers at
the at all levels are familiar with the
use of AI and confident in using AI
enabled tools going forward. So this is
a very broad baseline. Um it's a little
bit like a digitalization in the in the
uh previously that we want to encourage
all our workers to be digitally ready so
that they are comfortable in using
digital tools and similarly in AI at the
first level we want to have a broad
adoption and uh and and acceptance of
the AI technology and skills at the
second level within the companies for
companies that are bigger we want to
encourage them to invest in building up
AI capability within the company and
these are what we all company based AI
centers of excellence. We support them,
we encourage them, we help them, we uh
give them grants so they are able to uh
put in their AI capability, build up
their AI capability and these are in the
beginning stage and it will take some
time for them to be able to familiarize
and to be able to confident in the
building up their AI centers of
excellence. Uh at the third level there
also are a lot of companies that are
much smaller. they don't have the
confidence to be able to build uh
company based AI centers of excellence.
So they want to be able to tap on some
national platforms and that's why we
also have national sectoral based AI
centers of excellence. One example is in
uh manufacturing which we have already
set up and we make that facility
available to man manufacturing companies
to tap on this capacity so that they can
build their AI capability once they are
familiar and confident they want to
build their own company based AI center
of excellence they can do so as and when
uh they are ready. So we adopt a
multiple multiprong approach in building
AI capability. uh in Singapore and you
uh mentioned about space and indeed we
do have a space office uh it's called uh
uh Austin uh uh space uh uh uh uh thank
I don't know the full full name uh of
the agency uh but we do have uh Austin
office uh uh that um I think it's office
for space and um uh uh and uh space
technology I think uh that's um we are
building huh Austin OSI office for
spaceology and industry.
>> Yeah.
>> Office for space industry and technology
and industry. So Austin uh so this is a
agency that oversees the development of
space technology and it is an uh area
that we have an interest in because um
with the emergence of um uh
communication requirements especially
with the 5G 5G technology I think the
low orbit u uh communication has become
a very important sector that we want to
grow and that's why we are also focusing
on developing our uh space uh industry
uh in Singapore but it's still early And
we do want to explore the different
possibility and opportunities in space
technology.
No further clarifications. Mr.
Mos Dinish Vasu Das.
[Music]
Mr. Deputy Speaker, sir, I rise I rise
in support of the motion to thank our
president for his address. Before I
proceed, may I please be allowed to say
a few words in Tamil.
for
Open the door.
coil. for
our Andreal.
for
Singapore.
Punjab Gujarati,
Muslim
Singap
in a way for
Singapore.
for
Singapore in victory.
Singapore
Singapore.
Mr. Speaker, we live in uncertain and
fractious times. We face a shifting
global order. the real impact of climate
change and the lingering aftershocks of
a once- in a generation pandemic. The
world today feels more volatile,
polarized, and far more anxious than
before. We are facing profound
challenges within Singapore, too. A
rapidly aging society, the rise in
technology, potentially displacing jobs,
and greater individualism.
We are also not immune to the global
trends and impact of rising populism and
protectionism.
However, this is not the first time
Singapore had seen trouble. Our founding
generation faced severe existential
concerns. Yet, both the government and
people worked together to defy all odds
and transform Singapore.
My generation was born after the trauma
of separation. But we had our challenges
too. While there were palpable economic
growth, there were uncertainties,
economic crisis, and we did not take
anything for granted. Like many families
then, my brother and I were taught to
treasure what little we had and to
always care for those who needed help.
This had been the ethos of the Singapore
story.
We had our crisis too. When the COVID
pandemic 19, sorry, when the coid9
pandemic hit, I saw firsthand how the
leadership worked hand in hand with our
people to save lives and livelihoods. I
consider it an honor to have served
Singapore during the pandemic and to
have the voice of the underprivileged
being represented as I served, solved
problems and pushed boundaries. Today's
generation face different challenges and
a different lived experience. In fact,
in my conversation with young
Singaporeans, I hear both optimism and
unease. They believe in Singapore, but
they want their voices to be heard. and
they want to know that this country will
work for them even as the world changes.
This will therefore be my first area of
focus, our youth. Understandably, their
points of reference are different from
ours where development exists, systems
work, but there are their expectations
are for them to work better.
While there are more opportunities both
locally and overseas, our youth are
apprehensive about their types of jobs,
their families, their future, and about
global justice, climate change, and the
environment. To them, I say your voice
matters. My colleagues and I are
committed to listening to you, to
understand your concerns, and to work
with you to fulfill your dreams. This
generation understands different
pathways to success and has what it
takes to overcome the hurdles that life
throws at them. Take for example Mr.
Wong Kachun. While performing for the SF
military band during his national
service, he suffered a nerve injury.
During his rec recovery, he discovered
his talent in being a composer and a
conductor. After receiving the Liquanu
scholarship and scoring the first prize
at the Gustaf Mara conducting
competition, Kachun had many notable
appearances such as being appointed as
chief conductor to Germany's Neuremberg
Symphony Orchestra and the and the
Japan Philharmonic Orchestra. Last year
he was appointed the principal conductor
and artistic adviser of the Haley, a
165year-old symphony orchestra based in
Manchester in the United Kingdom.
This year he made history as the first
Singaporean to conduct at the BBC
Prominard Concerts, the world famous
classical musical festival held annually
in London. Kachchun had blazed the trail
and had shown young Singaporeans that
it's possible to carve out meaningful
careers even in less conventional
fields. When I asked him for his message
to younger Singaporeans, he said, and I
quote, "Dream boldly, work with
discipline, and always remember that our
heritage can be the source of our
greatest creativity." These are profound
words from a Singaporean youth that we
are all very proud of. However, there
are anxieties on the availability of
jobs and potential displacements due to
technology as well as global economic
shifts. To this, I would say don't
despair. My colleagues and I at the
Ministry of Manpower will do whatever we
can to help to be a bridge for you and
to help to connect you to jobs, access
your career health, highlight industries
that are growing and to help you acquire
the skills needed for roles in these
sectors.
Further, in my capacity as the co-chair
of the economic theories review
committee, I'm sorry, the economic
strategies review committee on
entrepreneurship, I hope to be able to
provide new opportunities to help
fulfill your aspirations.
My fellow co-chair MOS Alvin Tan and I
are determined to create a bustling
culture of entrepreneurship where our
youth would be able to fulfill personal
aspirations and in the process solidify
Singapore's place as an entrepreneurship
hub.
This is another clear reflection of how
the government works with all
Singaporeans to provide for better, more
prosperous futures by connecting them to
jobs. While we secure the futures of our
young, we must continue to value and
respect those who had built Singapore,
past and present. This brings me to my
second area of focus, our seniors.
Singapore had been designated as a blue
zone 2.0 country as our residents live
exceptionally long life expecties.
Singapore's longevity is attributed to
an engineered environment which is
almost exclusively based on government
policies, urban planning and a
population that is generally
healthconscious.
We are expected to be super aged by the
year 2026 and one in four residents will
be above the age of 65 by 2030.
In fact, my constituency in Beduk and
Siglup, one in four residents are
already above the age of 65. We are 5
years ahead of schedule. If I were to
expand the age bracket to those who are
above 60, then 32% or almost one-third
of my residents would qualify.
Many of our seniors are fit and active
and have much to contribute to our
nation, including our workforce.
We should provide as many opportunities
as possible, especially for those who
are willing and able to work. The
Ministry of Health's Healthier SG and
Age Well SG have been significant
programs that has the potential to
change the aging landscape in Singapore.
With the speed and comprehensive nature
of the roll out of both initiatives,
particularly Agewells SG, residents of
HDB towns would benefit tremendously
from such programs. Given the sheer
numbers of seniors among us, it would be
useful to expand the program which
includes social gatherings, exercise and
therapy sessions to include private
estates as well. Unfortunately, not all
of us will be able to age gracefully.
Some of us might unfortunately be
affected by illnesses and disease. This
might be so despite our best efforts in
taking care of ourselves and living
wisely.
My wife's grandmother was one such
person. Suffering from a severe mental
illness for many years. I could see the
psychological toll it took on her entire
family. Nevertheless, my in-laws took it
in their stride and did their duty,
always with a warm, loving smile till
her last days.
I believe more can be done to support
our seniors.
like my wife's grandmother and their
families. I wish to continue to push for
such initiatives both at the policy and
implementation levels and to be a voice
for our seniors to live dignified lives.
My third area of focus will be on
protecting the vulnerable.
One of our key policy pillars had been
that families and societies form the
basic safety nets for individuals with
disabilities.
However, with competing demands,
reducing family sizes, and Singapore's
economic development, it is not
unreasonable for there to be more to be
the expectation for the state to do
slightly more. Not for the government to
be the sole safety net, but to play a
stronger role. For those who may be able
to work, we should be giving them a fair
wage for their efforts. The Ministry of
Manpower had been rolling out the
progressive wage model or PWM. And most
recently, I announced the PWM for the
retail sector. The PWM is the
government's way of ensuring that the
most vulnerable among our workers are
protected and that their salaries are
increased in tandem to cope with the
cost of living. To complement the
government's efforts, businesses must
also continue to restructure themselves
and workers must acquire new skills to
remain employable.
We must not forget our migrant workers
who take on much of the toil that
Singaporeans prefer not to do. Our
buildings and infrastructure are built
on their blood, sweat, and tears. As
their daily contributions, as if their
daily contributions were not enough,
they occasionally transform into
superheroes to save Singaporeans in
need. In my capacity at the Ministry of
Manpower, I've had the pleasure of
working closely with our migrant workers
and hope that Singaporeans will continue
to open their hearts to them and to
support them, not only when they perform
heroic acts from time to time. Speaking
of daily heroes, the demands on
caregivers, particularly those taking
care of physically or intellectually
disabled people can be time-conuming and
both emotionally and financially
draining. I do think more can be done to
support our caregivers. I was therefore
happy to inaugurate the enable services
hub at block 28 at the new upper Changi
road which is which was a groundup
initiative between my grassroots SG
enable and like-minded partners.
Together the hub aims to provide
services for those with intellectual and
physical disabilities and for our
caregivers to to have a reprieve from
their daily responsibilities.
Take for example Madame Wendy Go who had
been making four trips every week for
her 21-year-old daughter Nicole Chu who
has an intellectual disability from
their home in Boke to Temp.
As we can imagine this was difficult and
draining. Now with the enabling services
hub at block 28, Nicole can join
inclusive activities that would help her
learn, grow, and connect with others in
the community. closer to home.
Ultimately, Singaporeans facing physical
or mental disabilities together with
their families deserve to live
fulfilling lives. I will do my best to
ensure that no one is left behind.
The uncertainties in the world are
likely to continue and there could be
pressures on our resolve and our unity.
Some may draw comparisons between the
halves and the have nots. Others may
turn nivists trying to draw the
distinction between second or third
generation with first generation
Singaporeans.
During such times, we should strengthen
our resolve and fall back on our values.
We have always celebrated groundup
initiatives based on self-reliance and a
strong work ethic just like my in-laws.
Hence wanting to be a we first society
does mean that we are not that we are
wholly individualistic. Previously
indeed we celebrate and strengthen
ourselves to be one united Singapore. A
Singapore where our vulnerable are able
to live dignified lives. A Singapore
where Singapore where everyone is
respected. A Singapore where individual
contributions are honored and cherished
regardless of age and a Singapore where
our youth would continue to have a
bright future. Mr. Speaker, sir, I
support the motion.
>> Mr. Melvin,
thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me
to join in the debate. Sir, I stand in
support of the motion. Id like to thank
Mr. President for laying out the key
priorities for this new term of
government. I agree with Mr. President
that our nation's success must never be
ma measured by economic growth alone. It
must be judged by how we support the
vulnerable and how we enable every
Singaporean to contribute and to live
with dignity. As we begin the 15th
Parliament, it is timely to reflect on
how far we have come in uplifting our
lower wage workers and more importantly
the work that still lies ahead.
Over the last decade, we have made
significant strides in improving the
wages, welfare, and work conditions of
our lower wage workers. Between 2019 and
2024, the real wage the real wages of
workers at the 20th percentile grew by
5.9%.
Outpacing the 3.6 growth, outpacing the
3.6% growth for the median worker. This
shows that our policies are lifting
those at the lower end of the wage
ladder. Some ask why Singapore has not
adopted a universal minimum wage. The
answer lies in the strength of our
progressive wage model or PWM.
Unlike a single wage floor applied
across the board, PWM is tailored to
specific sectors, covers over 40 job
roles today, and enables workers to
progress through skills and
productivity.
Today, more than 155,000 workers across
nine sectors and occupations are covered
by PWM.
Take the cleaning sector. A decade ago,
a general office cleaner earn about
$600.
Today, the entry wage is at least
$1,910.
Workers like Aziza Abdul Majid, a single
mother who upgraded herself from
part-time cleaner to team leader, show
how PWM creates dignity, career
progression, and better livelihoods.
In the security sector, the basic
monthly wage of an entry-level security
officer was about $1,100
in 2016.
From 1st January this year, 2025, that
basic wage rose to at least $2,870
and by 2028, it will further increase to
about $3,530.
Many security officers are now running
digital systems and handling crop
control duties, roles now seen as
skilled professions.
Just as important are the personal
stories behind these numbers. One
example is Civamani Tiger Jen whose
father once worked long hours as a
security guard to support the family.
Today as a security supervisor, she
leads a command center, embraces new
technology, and inspires others to join
the industry. more than higher pay. She
now has pride and purpose in a
profession that has been transformed by
PWM.
At the national level, inequality has
narrowed. The Genie coefficient has
fallen from 0.464
in 2014
to 0.435
in 2024.
This is before transfers and taxes. If
we take into account both transfers and
taxes, the Genie coefficient drops
further to 0.364.
Sir, these achievements were not
overnight. They were built on strong
tripartite trust and tough negotiations.
In 2021, the tripartite work group on
lower wage workers put forth 18
recommendations.
I'm glad to know that by working
together by July 2023 all 18
recommendations were implemented.
Each year the National Wages Council and
other tripartite platform continues to
issue guidelines with a strong focus on
uplifting our lower wage workers.
So while progress has been made, the
journey is far from complete. Inflation
continues to weigh heavily. NTU's June
2025 survey showed that lower inome
households are most worried about the
rising cost of food, groceries, and
healthcare. Many are also supporting
both young children and elderly parents.
Workers know upskilling is key, but
often struggle to identify relevant
training or meaningful career
opportunities.
I had spoken about this before in this
house highlighting the two common
questions that workers have. Train what?
Train for what?
Long working hours remain an issue. In
security officers still work 12-hour
shifts 6 days a week. Higher wages
cannot come at the expense of health,
well-being, and family life. The talent
pipelines remain thin. Younger younger
Singaporeans are not joining PWM sectors
in sufficient numbers, raising concerns
about long-term sustainability for the
service providers.
Implement implementation challenges also
persist. PWM wage negotiations are
becoming tougher in today's economic
climate and close monitoring is needed
to prevent uneven application or cost
shifting.
These challenges make it even more
critical that our tripartite partners
stand firm in upholding fair and
sustainable outcomes for our workers.
Amidst these challenges, NTUC and our
unions will continue to work hard to
ensure that wages keep pace and workers
are not left behind.
Beyond wages, our unions play a hands-on
role negotiating fairer workplace
conditions, supporting upskilling, and
providing aid through our NTUC UK fund
for members and their families facing
financial stress. But our mission is far
from complete. Income at the 20th
percentile is about 55% of median
income, short of the OECD benchmark of
2/3. To close this gap, NTUC believes it
is timely to convene a refresh tropite
work group on lower wage workers to
chart the next bound of progress. This
group must be bold, be ambitious and be
focused on both wages and sustain career
progression. NTU will also seek to
broaden and deepen the impact of the
progressive wage model in two key areas.
First by placing stronger emphasis on
productivity as the enabler of
sustainable wage growth. For example,
800 super waste management. They work
with the built environment and urban
trades employees union deployed AI
enabled recycling bins under a company
training committee framework. This
boosted productivity, reduced
contamination, and more importantly
enabled higher value jobs with a 5% pay
increase for 100 workers.
Second, by expanding PWM into more
sectors. One area that I've raised
before is pest management. An essential
service in public health, but still
plagued by low wages and high attrition.
A PWM here would create structured
career and wage ladders strengthening
both livelihoods and the resilience of
the sector.
Beyond PWM, the local qualifying salary,
LQS
ensures that firms hiring foreign
manpower also uplift local wages. The
last increase brought the threshold to
$1,600
in July 2024.
NTU calls on the government to further
raise the LQS in this term of government
to narrow the gap between lower wage and
median workers.
At the same time, NTUC recognizes that
some workers may need more help. Through
the NTUC UK fund, we will continue to
support vulnerable families and those
hit by sudden hardship.
NTU's enterprises also play a part. The
Fair Price Group, for example, continues
to keep essentials affordable, helping
families cope even as wages rise. The
labor movement has and will continue to
do our part in helping to nurture a we
first society at every level.
Mr. Speaker, allow me to speak a few
words in Mandarin.
Fore
speech.
for
example.
LQS.
sir. Over the past decade, PWM has
become a cornerstone of our labor
compact. Government data has shown that
wages for those at the 20th percentile
has risen higher than the median and
consequently income inequality has
narrowed. More importantly, behind these
numbers are real workers and real
families. The cleaner supporting his
children's education, the security
officer spending more time with his
family, or the pest management worker
seeking career progression. NTC remains
firmly committed to walking this journey
with our workers. Together with our
tripartite partners and the wider
community, we'll continue to build a
fairer, more inclusive Singapore where
no worker is left behind. As we embark
on this new term, I urge the government
to press on boldly with progressive wage
expansion, further raise the local
qualifying salary, and strengthen
support for training and upskilling.
These moves are essential to close the
income gap, secure sustainable wage
growth, and uphold our shared vision of
a society where every worker can
progress with dignity. Because at NTU,
we firmly believe that every worker
matters. Thank you,
>> leader.
Mr. Speaker, I wish to move to extend
the proceedings beyond the moment of
interruption for the benefit of new
members. Proceedings in parliament end
automatically at 7 p.m. unless extended
by the speaker or uh moved to be
extended by myself. Mr. Speaker, may I
seek your consent and the general ascent
of members present to move a motion to
take the proceedings on the business set
down on the order paper for today beyond
the moment of interruption.
>> I give my consent. Does the leader have
the general ascent of honorable members
to so move?
>> Leader.
>> Mr. Speaker, I move that the proceedings
on the business set down on the order
paper for today be proceeded with beyond
the moment of interruption.
The question is the motion moved by the
leader. Those who agree say I.
>> Those who disagree say no.
I think the eyes have it. The eyes have
Mr. Fley FY.
As Mr. Thman relayed the government's
vision of a we first society where
Singaporeans will put the collective
before the self or the Wii before the
MI. This reiterates the prime minister's
message in his national day rally about
the importance of feeling that we are
all in this together and not just
looking out for our own self-interest.
Sir, we know Singaporeans are not
selfish people. Our citizens do not only
care for their self-interest.
Time and again, Singaporeans have
demonstrated their public-spirited and
civic-minded character. Our communist
communities have robust and
long-standing traditions of acting in
solidarity for the sake of the
collective interest.
I'm sure the house is familiar with the
term gong royong. Many older Malays
especially those who lived in Kongs may
fondly remember participating in a
rayang for a kanduri where extended
relatives and even neighbors would come
to help the host family prepare for a
wedding.
We can also look at how the Chinese
community rallied together to establish
the old Nanyang University. Nanta was a
monumental achievement of collective
sacrifice and solidarity. I want to
recount the words of Hansu Yin from her
autobiography, My House has two doors,
where she described the collective
founding of Nanda. She wrote, "How many
oyster omelets, sliced crab, noodles of
all kinds went into Nanyang University.
The triaw peddlers of Singapore and
Malaya pedled for three days and turned
it all in for Nanyang University. And
theirs was the greatest sacrifice for
they were so very poor.
She goes on to say, "Rubber tappers
flocked to give. They knew that their
children would never have a chance to go
to university, but it was a culture
gesture or cultural identity. It was
incredible and magnificent and it must
be remembered.
More importantly, our sense of
generosity and solidarity extrens cross
communally. The Straits Times reported
on 27th June that the Singaporean public
raised more than 2.4 4 million in aid
for Gaza. I was especially heartened to
learn that our local temples were among
the many donors to the cause.
Mr. Speaker, I hope my point here is
clear. Singaporeans have always been
willing to work for the common good.
Singaporeans do care about others and we
are able to see beyond our own personal
interest. In fact, our success in nation
building is a testament to our citizens
working together for the public
well-being.
Sir, the president spoke of a we first
society where success is not measured
only by personal achievement but what we
do together for for the common good.
But why do Singaporeans now appear to be
more concerned about their personal
achievements over the common good?
I want to raise two possible factors.
The first relates to the unintended
consequences of meritocracy.
The sense that the second is the growing
sense of precariousness that many
Singaporeans feel. Mr. Speaker, allow me
to elaborate on this in Malay.
elitist
meritocracy and elitism in a global
city.
discrimination.
Meritocracy for extreme
ideology. ology.
We first
meritocracy.
precariousness.
for
[Music]
any reality.
Singapore.
Mr. Speaker, I just explained that when
we uncritically idealize meritocracy, we
risk blaming the disadvantage for their
plight and lording the successful for
their fortune. We our own
willingness to aid those who live
paycheck to paycheck, those who are
today condemned to an increasingly
precarious existence.
I make the point about precariousness to
highlight how difficult it is to think
about the we when the me is valiantly
struggling to make ends meet and ek out
a living. I think sir it is unreasonable
to expect our people to think we first
without first addressing how many of our
citizens feel that they already
overworked and overburdened.
Sir, I wish to offer my own thoughts
about a we first society. The house
should not just exhort our citizens to
do more, but also call on the government
to take the lead in ensuring that all
Singaporeans can pursue a dignified
life.
Moreover, I believe that when each and
every person is afforded with dignity,
it can lead to a more civic and
public-minded behavior. So, what do I
mean by dignity? It means that no matter
their background and no matter their lot
in life, every Singaporean must be able
to contribute to society and receive
support from society.
Importantly, this means that those who
are falling behind or may need
additional help are regarded with
respect and their needs properly
accommodated instead of being as a
burden on others.
On this occasion sir, I want to focus on
dignity as it relates to our elderly. It
is unconscionable that some of them
remain class among the working poor
having to make a living through menial
jobs even in their 60s and 70s.
Every member of this house would have
met the cleaners, delivery workers and
hocusol assistants in their con
constituencies who are forced to persist
in gruelling labor despite their
advanced age and sometimes in spite of
health issues.
Some of them might even find themselves
having to live in rental home with other
strangers.
Even as I admire their resilience and
work ethic, I'm sure that we can do
better for our elderly,
this house would surely agree that being
forced into this situation is not a
dignified way of living out once
golden's ears.
We all want the best for our elderly.
More importantly, we do not resent or
begrudge them as they need more as they
develop more needs as they grow older.
Rather, we recognize that it is a matter
of their dignity that we do our best to
accommodate those needs. The government
has indeed moved in this direction of
better supporting our elderly in
including increasing its healthcare
expenditure from 10 billion in 2019 to
20.9 billion in 2025.
However, a weer society, especially one
as wealthy as ours, must also attend to
our elderly's post-material needs to
enable them to pursue a life of dignity.
To live your golden years with peace of
mind in a quiet place that you can call
your own without having to worry about
your next meal, medical bill, or bus
ride. Such a life of dignity is surely
what we owe to our pioneer and ma
generations after they have devote
devoted their prime years to Singapore.
When the minimum income standard 2033
report was previously discussed in this
house, there was much debate over
whether a sense of belonging, respect,
security and independence was a basic
need or aspirational.
To me, however, the more pertinent
question is, what can we do to make it
easier for our senior citizens to live a
dignified life, to feel respected and
secure as our fellow citizens, and
recognize they do belong to Singapore as
independent and autonomous persons
rather than a social burden.
I think at the very least
we can make their lives easier by
offering them free of pig travel on
public transport as the workers party
has proposed in our manifesto. In
facilitating their mobility, the elderly
not only retain their independence and
autonomy, but it can also encourage
their participation in social activities
and allow them to continue being an
active member of society. And I'm sure
that most, if not all, Singaporeans
would not begrudge offering such dignity
to the elderly.
After all, it will be an affirmation
that our elderly belong here. As part of
the collective, we I want to emphasize
the importance of dignity because while
we remain conscious of the cost, elder
care should be more than a matter of
considering cost and economic
efficiency.
Instead, it is about our collective
values as a society and how we choose to
take care of the vulnerable among us.
I highlighted the plight of our elderly
poor, Mr. Speaker, to de demonstrate how
we the pursuit of a weer society is for
not if the Wii is not properly inclusive
and allows certain groups of
Singaporeans to lack behind. A weer
society must be sensitive to the
different needs of different groups
which include being prepared to offer an
extra helping hand if the sit situation
requires it.
I miss once poetically described how
there is a place for all at the rendevu
of victory. Sir, I am sure that this
house agrees that Singapore at our own
ren rendevu of victory must be a place
for all that when we win we all win.
This however requires the government to
sometimes step in so that each and every
Singaporean has the opportunity to live
a life with dignity.
This creates a virtuous circle where all
of us are assured the opportunity to
pursue a life of dignity. It comes
naturally to us to be more attentive and
extend our consideration to those who
are disadvantaged or not as fortunate.
As I have stated at the outset,
Singaporeans are not selfish people. We
care for others and we follow that up
with concrete actions.
History has shown that we are able to
set aside our personal interests and
sometimes even sacrifice them for a
common cause.
These sentiments of collective
solidarity, however, cannot simply be
forced, but they can be nurtured by
ensuring that all citizens have the
resources and opportunities needed to
pursue a dignified life. This would
foster the sense of security and
belonging necessary to motivate
collective action. In other words, it is
only when each of us feels that we are
truly valued members of society that we
can become a we for society. M Mr.
Speaker, I support the motion.
SMS Zaki moment.
Mr. Speaker, the world today is being
reshaped by powerful forces. Earlier,
the PM gun and members of the House
spoke about geopolitical tension,
economic volatility,
technological disruption, and the
looming crisis of climate change. Today
I'll focus on one of the greatest
threats to our generation and that is
climate disruption.
It is not tomorrow's problem. It is
already here and around the world the
pace of climate action is slowing. The
spirit of global cooperation is
weakening. In fact, some countries have
already wavered in their Paris agreement
pledges.
Even with current commitments, the world
is on track for warming at two or three
degrees, well below the 1.5 degrees that
science tell us is safe. Singapore
contributes just 0.1% of global
emissions. But we will still feel the
full force of climate change. While we
cannot change the world's trajectory
alone, we must be prepared to live with
its consequences.
As Prime Minister Lawrence Wong said in
his national rally speech, we must look
ahead, anticipate what is on our
horizon, and prepare to ride the next
wave of change.
That is the hallmark of the PAP
government. We govern not just for the
next election cycle, but for future
generations of Singaporeans.
Throughout our history, the PAP
government has made bold decisions with
foresight and discipline. We invested in
water resilience before others even
thought about it. New water,
desalination, local catchments. We
transformed waste management with
incineration and adapted pulas macau. We
cleaned up the Singapore River and
tackled air pollution long before
environmentalism was fashionable.
As our founding prime minister, Mr. Lee
Kwanu once declared, "I'm calculating
not in terms of the next election. I'm
calculating in terms of the next
generation, in terms of the next hundred
years, in terms of eternity.
And this was said back in 1965.
And this spirit endures in today's
political leadership.
Singapore's future and our survival is
at the front and center of everything
that we do. Our adaptation strategy is
not peacemeal. It is coordinated. It is
ambitious. It is backed by long-term
thinking across generations of leaders.
We are looking 30, 50, even 100 years
ahead. And that is why we have committed
about a hundred billion dollars over the
next century for coastal protection.
Now, this is not an elections or
political slogan. We're just four or
five months out into the new term. But
it is a serious financial commitment,
one that we plan prudently and that we
will fund sustainably through our fiscal
policies and reserves. There are very
very few countries in the world that can
say the same.
Climate change is no longer abstract. It
is affecting our daily lives. By 2100,
sea levels could rise by 1.15 meters. If
you had storm surges, almost 30% of our
land today is at risk.
Think about East Coast Park, Sentosa,
Yunos Kambangan, and possibly up to
Tanjung Katon underwater.
Imagine Singapore without the coastlines
that we are familiar with. No evening
jogs or family picnics at East Coast
Park, no Marina Bay waterfront skyline.
These could be just memories of what we
used to be if we did nothing today. At
the same time, rainfall is intensifying.
We feel it. I feel it. I think you feel
it too. Extreme delay rainfall could
increase by 92% by 2100.
Over the years, the government has spent
billions of dollars on our canals and
drains to prevent floods. But extreme
rainfall will only mean that flash
floods in urban areas will only get more
common if we do not act.
The question is whether we can overcome
practical constraints to engineering and
costs to cater to extreme weather given
our tight land mass and highly developed
urban areas. The temperature is also
getting hotter due to global warming and
the urban heat island effect. Mean daily
temperatures may rise by 5 degrees by
2100.
Last year was the hottest year on record
globally. And in Singapore, our coldest
month today is already warmer than our
warmest month in the 1960s.
Imagine that. Our food security is also
at risk. We import more than 90% of our
food. Floods, droughts, and export bands
can disrupt supplies overnight. We saw
this during COVID and got us thinking of
new approaches and strategies to develop
food resilience. Water too is
vulnerable. Our four national taps give
us resilience. But the changing weather
patterns and rising demand means that we
must work harder.
Now these are not distant scenarios,
ladies and gentlemen. They are today's
lived realities and we can already feel
the changes.
At first glance, climate adaptation
feels like setting up various defense
measures across the country. seaw walls,
drains, border systems, solar panels and
food stockpiles.
But adaptation is also about vision. It
is about turning necessity into
opportunity.
Take Marina Baraj. History shows us why
such long-term projects matter. When
Marina Barrage was first proposed, there
were many who doubted its feasibility
and value.
Today, it's one of Singapore's most
iconic landmarks. a reservoir, a flood
barrier, a place where families gather
for recreation. What was once a bold
idea has now become a national treasure.
While it was built for flood control and
water supply, it is now a place where
families picnic, students learn, and
communities gather. Now that is the
approach that we must take. Protecting
our people and our assets with a purpose
and creating greater value in
adaptation.
We are embarking on a general effort to
protect our coastlines. The Long Island
project along East Coast Park will be
more than just a seaw wall. It will
include reclaimed land for homes, a
freshwater reservoir, and new spaces for
recreation.
We are creating value for our people by
providing more homes, more facilities,
and more opportunities while protecting
our coastline. At Pulaong, we have
completed Singapore's first border. The
border used half the sand required of
conventional reclamation while
increasing the training space for the
SCF, the size of two Chopayo towns. We
have launched sight specific studies for
greater southern waterfront, Changi,
Jong Island and more. And studies for
Sentosa and the southwest coast will
start by 2026.
Piece by piece, we are creating a ring
of resilience around Singapore.
But we are not on this journey alone.
The PAP government will continue to
build trust with Singaporeans and bring
our people with us for this journey and
for the long haul. We want to engage our
citizens. We will also consult nature
groups like the Nature Society because
resilience must also mean shared
ownership.
As President Tamman reminded us in his
presence address that this trust has
allowed us to make hard choices when
needed and to plan for the future beyond
current election cycles.
And this is precisely what adaptation
demands. Choices need to be made today
for risks that may arise decades ahead.
Youth and nature groups have already
come forward with ideas from marine bio
biodiversity corridors to recreational
spaces showing how Singaporeans want to
shape their future.
We're also building flood resilience in
land. So this year we launched an
alliance for action to co-create a flood
resilient developments guide book with
industry partners like the Singapore
Institute of Architects. The guide book
will give property owners and developers
a toolkit of flood protection measures.
These measures will enhance the flood
resilience of their premises while
allowing solutions that best integrate
with the design. We're also working with
businesses and residents in floodplone
areas and we distribute flood barriers.
We run awareness campaigns. No matter
how strong the storms are ahead, the
government will work with you to
overcome them together.
Climate resilience is not just about
engineering. It's really also about
mindset.
I'll now share our plans for heat
resilience. Rising heat is changing
daily lives and we are developing a
whole of government heat resilience
strategy. It covers urban planning,
building design, public health, and
community awareness.
The government has a national heatwave
response plan to protect Singaporeans.
And this will require the collective
effort of government, our employers, and
our people. For workers involved in
heavy physical labor, employers will
keep a close watch on heat stress levels
and ensure that they have sufficient
hydration and rest away from the sun.
Students can dress down or switch to
homebased learning if needed. Besides
the efforts from the government, the
public can also play its part.
Volunteers can check on vulnerable
groups such as the elderly in our
community to ensure that they are
adequately protected. We can open
cooling centers at CC's and the RC's for
vulnerable groups and monitor patients
and seniors in hospitals and elder care
centers.
Through the My ENV app, the public can
also get timely heat stress advisory
information on how to protect themselves
according to heat stress levels.
But ultimately, resilience is not just
about infrastructure. It is about
mindset. Just as total defense reminds
us that every Singaporean has a role in
our security, climate defense requires
collective action by everyone. And the
test will come during an extreme climate
event. Will we stand together, support
the vulnerable, and act as one people?
Now, that is what will define us as
Singaporeans.
We are also learning from others who
face extreme heat today. We are studying
heat waves in Europe, heat adaptation
measures in the Middle East, and
exploring novel cooling methods with
researchers and preparing before such
extreme events hit our shores. Looking
ahead, we are strengthening whole of
government coordination and partnering
businesses, academia, and the community
to develop an integrated heat resilience
strategy.
This will create shaded walkways, green
corridors, and cooling zones, which will
improve livability while making our
neighborhoods healthier and more
walkable. Already, URRA and HDB are
testing and scaling innovative measures
like new windflow modeling techniques
and cooling materials in our estates.
These are among new innovations that can
potentially make a difference in our
daily comfort in the long run.
Moving on to food and water resilience.
Food is a part of our culture and
identity but disruptions are becoming
more common today. Floods, droughts and
heat waves are affecting global global
crops crops globally. Co was a stark
reminder of our vulnerabilities. I
recall in 2020 there were concerns that
countries COVID measures would lead to
food supply disruptions such as eggs and
this led to increased demands for eggs
overnight. Yet within days we were able
to reassure the public of continued
supply due to our diversified sources
and stabilized demand. Now that
experience underlined why resilience is
non-negotiable.
That is why we are diversifying our
sources. Before COVID eggs came mostly
from one country. Today we import from
more than 10 countries while our local
farms here provide a third of our
supply.
Even as we increase local food
production, we will work to facilitate
food imports from new sources. At the
industry level, we will support our
local importers to nurture strong
relationships with business partners
through overseas sourcing and business
matching trips. Our local farms and food
production still matter. They are our
asserted source in crisis and we are
helping our farms to scale by addressing
key challenges of productivity, cost and
demand.
We want to encourage local farms to tap
on technology to grow food in a more
productive and climate resilient manner
through the agri food cluster innovation
or act fund. Farms such as green harvest
have invested in hydroponics greenhouse
with automated mobile gali systems. This
has made them five times more productive
than traditional farms.
But Singaporeans must also support local
produce. When we support our local
farmers and buy more local produce such
as chisim or sea bass, we are building
resilience for ourselves.
When Singaporeans choose produce with
the SG Fresh produce branding at
supermarkets on wet markets, you are
directly supporting our farmers and our
food security.
Local produce is fresher, lasts longer,
incurs lower carbon footprint to reach
us, and many are pest pesticide free.
I'm glad that industry players through
safer are already working on long-term
contracts between farmers and buyers.
Now, these are not abstract ideas. They
are already feeding Singaporeans today.
Likewise, water is essential to our
lives. And for Singapore, water is a
precious and limited resource. As then
PM Lee Sandong said in 2021,
water is a strategic and scarce resource
and is also precious fruit of our
labors. We are always pushing the limits
of our water resources.
We have over successive decades built a
robust and diversified water supply made
possible by right pricing water. We have
built up our four national taps, local
catchment, imported water, new water and
desalination to strengthen our water
resilience.
But as our water as our population
economy grows and as weather patterns
change, we have to work harder to
conserve this precious resource because
water security is also national
security.
Singapore's waste system is so efficient
to the point that it is pretty much out
of sight, out of mind. The issue for
Singapore is that we have very limited
land for waste management. And the
reality is that Samaka landfield may be
full by 2035 just 10 years ahead.
As Singapore becomes more affluent and
develops new industries, we will produce
and consume more. Hence, if we don't
manage our waste well, the world will
face issues of disposing them within the
next just 10 years. Since 2021, we have
collected over 30,000 tons of e-waste
under the extended producer
responsibility scheme to develop a
circular economy.
In 2026, we will launch the beverage
container return scheme to boost the
recycling of plastics and metals for
food waste large commercial industry
food generators in new buildings. They
must now segregate food waste for
treatment and this will be extended to
more and more buildings.
The industry is also setting up. It's
also stepping up. The AFA and packaging
waste reduction for the e-commerce
sector which included players like
Amazon and Shopppee has developed
guidelines to encourage the use of
sustainable packaging.
In our estates, new initiatives such as
rehab bins allow residents to deposit
recyclables, scan QR codes, and track
recycling habits. This helps to build
awareness and give families a sense of
ownership in reducing waste. But we must
also recognize that we have room to
improve. Our overall recycling rate
stands at about 50%. As compared to 60
63% in Australia.
This comparison is a reminder that
Singapore can and must do better with
our collective effort.
Everyone can do the three Rs. Reduce
consumption. Reuse what you can. Recycle
right. And this only works if we all
commit together.
Moving on to a lowcarbon future.
Despite the backsliding of global
climate action, Singapore must stay the
course in our transition to a lowcarbon
future. There is the economic imperative
to ensure that our businesses and jobs
remain competitive for the long term. We
will continue to support businesses with
incentives to improve their energy
efficiency. And based on the latest data
from the International Energy Agency,
Singapore's energy intensity will rank
among the lowest one-third if compared
to all OECD countries. Singapore imports
almost all of our energy supply and it
is important that Singapore raises our
energy efficiency to make every jewel
count.
As businesses improve on the energy
efficiency, we will continue to
calibrate the price signal through the
carbon tax which aims to enhance the
business case for lowcarbon solutions.
The government uses the carbon tax we
collect to support businesses in the
green transition and we encourage
adoption of lowcarbon technologies such
as solar power.
Well, the good news is that Singapore
has achieved our 2025 solar deployment
target of 1.5 gawatt peak and is on
track to meet our goal of at least 2
gawatt peak by 2030.
We also partnering industry for other
climate mitigation measures such as high
quality carbon credits as well as
crossber carbon capture and storage. As
regional countries explore nuclear
power, we are building capabilities in
nuclear science and safety through the
nucle Singapore nuclear research and
safety institute. We aim to grow from 50
to 100 experts by 2030 and this will
allow us to assess risk prudently and
plan for long-term possibilities.
Households too play their part. The
climate friendly household program
supports household in switching to
efficient appliances. As of August 2025,
78% of eligible HDB and 55% of private
households have claimed their private
their climate vouchers, of which $187
million has been utilized. Now, this
helps households saves on utility bills
while helping to lower our carbon
footprint.
We're also making full use of our land.
By 2030, nearly every HTB block with a
suitable rooftop will be fitted with
solar panels. And these panels power
common services, lifts, lights, and
water pumps, directly lowering energy
costs for residents and town councils.
Mr. Speaker,
climate change is the defining challenge
of our generation.
Every adaptation measure I have shared,
whether it is the hundred billion
dollars in coastal protection, national
heat strategies, food and water
resilience, or circular economy
innovation, reflects more than just
engineering. It reflects a philosophy of
governance. A philosophy rooted in the
PAP government's long-term view passed
down from our founding fathers across
generations of political leaders and to
the 4G leaders of today.
This is rooted in fiscal prudence,
political will, and the conviction that
every generation must leave behind a
stronger foundation for the next.
As Minister Graceful reminded us at the
V3 National Climate Change Study
Symposium last year, climate change is
an existential threat for Singapore and
the government treats it with utmost
seriousness. We are investing
significantly to better understand it
and starting our planning and
preparatory works.
In the next 5 years, we will develop
Singapore's inaugural national
adaptation plan or NAP in short, which
minister announced this year at COS
2025.
The NAP will be our living road map to
address the physical risk and social
impact of climate change.
Now this is the commitment that my
colleagues and I at MSE bring to this
work. We plan, we prepare and we
actively because safeguarding Singapore
is first to our duty.
President Tamman shared in his address
at opening session of this parliament.
We will nurture a we first society at
every level starting in the community.
And that is our calling today to take
the long view to put we before me to
protect tomorrow with resilience steward
today's resources responsibly and ensure
that Singapore our little red dot
continues to thrive in a turbulent
world. This is the PAP government's
promise to govern not just for the next
election but for future for future
generations to come and for us for all
of us here in this chamber to do so with
the same courage and foresight of our
founding fathers that built the
Singapore that we enjoy today. Thank you
Mr. Speaker. Can I continue please?
for
Singapore.
Singapura
Singapur.
for
Singapore.
Project Long
East Coast coast
resilency habar.
community
infrastructure
defense
resilenc
technology
label SG fresh produce
new water desalination
[Music]
discipline.
industry
trade
is
renewable energy project LTMS. MS
for
discipline
committed.
MSE
commitment
Singapore.
Speaker,
Mr. Impaling.
Sorry, Mr. Shahut.
>> Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I
would like I'll just like to raise a
clarification on Mr. Fley's speech
earlier. He mentioned a fundraiser where
more than $2.4 $4 million of funds was
raised for Gaza. Uh, and one of the
donors was from a temple. Was he
referring to the MCQ fundraiser for
Gaza?
Mr. Fley.
Perhaps uh Mr. Fi you give you some
time. I will call on Mr. Tim Paling
first.
Mr. Speaker, sir, I rise to support the
address of thanks to President Tamman's
speech at this parliament's opening.
President in his speech spoke of
Singapore being at a critical juncture
in our history as we celebrate SG60 and
the importance of how we must remain
resilient and inclusive embracing the we
first mindset even as we navigate a
turbulent world and transform for the
future. Indeed, Singapore's story has
been remarkable characterized by a
silent defiance. Firstly, defying the
odds of history. When Singapore became
independent in 1965, many doubted our
survival. We were a small nation with no
natural resources. Deep social divides,
racial riots, and hostile neighbors
could have torn us apart. Yet, we defied
the odds. Through grit, unity, and
foresight, we transformed ourselves into
a thriving economy and a cohesive
society that we are proud of today. Our
early generations refused to be defined
by limitations and built a nation
greater than the sum of its parts. Then
defying the odds of deglobalization and
a turbulent world. Today the odds we
face are different but just as
formidable. The global order is
shifting. Major powers are contesting
influence and the economic climate is
more uncertain than ever. Following the
Cold War, PEX Americana shaped the
international order, building
institutions, establishing rules-based
international order and delivering a
long period of relative stability and
prosperity. Yet, concentration of power
carries risk if a single hedgeimon
seizes to act as a steady rules-based
steward. The global system can be
destabilized. Recent trends from abrupt
policy shifts, perceived abandonment of
allies, sudden tariff escalations and
weakening of multilateral and
international bodies have exposed those
vulnerabilities and heightened
geopolitical uncertainty. These have
significant impact on how supply chains
are structured on trade and talent flow
and talent flows and definitely on
Singapore. Escalating geopolitical
rivalry and US protectionism will
reshape sourcing, manufacturing location
decisions, logistics patterns and trade
flows. These will affect Singapore's
advanced manufacturing which contributes
to over 20% of our trade of our GDP and
other sectors of the trade and our
status as a hub. Interestingly, in a
recent closed door sharing organized by
my firm with large-scale international
payment service providers supporting
crossber trade, an observation made was
that trade is now more point-to-point as
opposed to passing through central
nodes. Also, French shoring by firms
would also mean that trades happen
within allied blocks. Singapore would
have to ensure that we continue to
participate in the various trading
blocks which we have been thankfully so
far. But this is also contingent on not
being forced to choose sides. In
addition, the US tariffs, if they
persist, could have profound
implications on Singapore as highlighted
by our leaders in this house before. The
US tariff on Singapore may be relatively
low. But given how we import, value add,
and then export, other countries could
pass the cost of tariffs to us,
resulting in our overall costs and
prices to go up at some point. coupled
with the possibility of preferential
trade agreements favoring bilateral
corridors and logistics optimizations,
we could be priced out of the
competition and trades and firms could
bypass Singapore altogether. As
countries increasingly turn inward,
adopting the benefits of globalization
and retreating from multilateralism, one
wonders how can Singapore companies
still dream global. Hence, in face of
these extrinsic challenges, Singapore
must remain a stable node in an unstable
world, a place where investors can trust
the rule of law, where talent knows
merit is valued, and where citizens feel
secure amidst global disruption. At the
same time, we must be a stable node that
is resilient. As a hub, we have to offer
secure and diversified services to
support the supply chains and trade. We
also have to enhance our trade
facilitation and digital services to
keep competitive. We must also be a
stable node with many connections. We
must continue to be among the world's
most open and connected hubs in air and
sea transport, in trade and finance, in
talents, data flows, and digital
networks. Here, I applaud our
government's efforts in constantly
building up our position as air and sea
hubs. The much anticipated Terminal 5
and Changi East development will no
doubt add to Singapore's competitive
advantage. It is also encouraging to
know of our government's efforts to sign
more free trade agreements and digital
economy agreements making sure we
maintain high standards and
interoperability for data digital infra
and networks so that trade and
innovations can still flourish. Could we
do more? The answer must be yes.
Technological advancements have been
enablers but also game changers.
Singapore may not be known for inventing
foundational technologies, but we can
invent new systems and excel in
applications built upon these
technologies. For example, leverage our
strategic position in Azan and build
regional digital financial
infrastructure. It could be an
interoperable payment rails using tokens
to reduce our region's over reliance on
any particular currency or crossber
payment rail. It could be a crossber
real payments utility hosted in
Singapore given our strong legal and
regulatory trust framework. It could be
a tokenized trade and commodities
platform to facilitate trade finance. It
could also be an independent digital
arbitration and compliance registry
trusted by companies and institutions
for sanctions, export control, vetting
and contract enforcement. Leveraging our
strong legal services combined with the
use of blockchain for audit trails and
AI for evidence analysis. It could be a
certified geopolitically neutral cloud
and confidential compute marketplace for
regional or international enterprises
needing to maintain independence. It
could also be a decentralized energy and
critical minerals marketplace offering
trusted certifications as geopolitical
competition for energy and critical
minerals intensify. Some of these are
probably already being considered by the
government or happening as we speak.
These are just broad ideas and examples
of how Singapore can defy the odds of
our extrinsic reality. I'm sure there
are many other and better ideas out
there. So in this term, I urge that we
continue promoting public private
partnerships to discover new ideas to
deliver excellence and to create new
possibilities for Singapore. Ultimately,
our relentless pursuit for economic
progress, survival in this case, is and
must be rooted in our pursuit of
improving lives for our people.
So even as the world churns and
pressures, Singapore must endeavor to
remain stable. As others build walls,
Singapore will build bridges. Next,
defying the odds of demographics. At
home, our society is also changing. Our
population is aging. Our generations
face vastly different challenges. The
way we live, work, and play are
different. Our policies, approach, and
infrastructure have to evolve. Gen Z
today face challenges different from
that of mine. Because of the CO9
pandemic, Gen Z Singaporeans missed out
on internships and overseas exchange
experiences. Also, with the rise of AI,
entry-level jobs are affected and job
search strategies that used to work may
no longer work. Now, fragmented career
paths could be a permanent trend. It is
thus heartening to observe the
government's efforts in supporting our
youth in these in their education and
employment. Such efforts to empower and
keep them relevant must continue. Many
may see an aging population as a burden,
but in Singapore, we can and should
shape how we age. We can organize
ourselves so that seniors enjoy
healthier and more fulfilling lives,
supported by better healthare, stronger
communities, and lifelong learning. Much
has been said about how to support our
seniors better, so I will not expound
them again here. But what is worth
repeating is that we must make sure that
our seniors today and tomorrow do not
give up on ourselves. We must not be
handicapped by our own prejudices
towards old age. We must continue to
work on our policies, infrastructure,
and programs to enable seniors to live
healthier, work better if they so
choose, and play harder. Defy the odds
by transforming longevity into our
source of strength. It is not just our
people who age. So does our hardware
infrastructure. Singapore's hardware and
infrastructure from HTB flats and estate
common facilities to railway networks,
power cables and more underpin daily and
community life. Economic activity and
national resilience. Much of this built
capital has served our nation well for
decades. But with demographic shifts,
technological changes, climate risks,
and simply the passage of time mean that
the business as usual maintenance and
periodic upgrades are no longer
sufficient. Singapore must refresh
existing hardware and infrastructure
more intensively and build new future
ready ones to sustain living standards.
Firstly, with age comes wear and tear.
Pipes, lifts, wall ceilings and other
components in flats and housing
precincts suffer wear, obsolescence, and
greater fault frequency. Worse, if they
happen together. For those of us who
have mature housing estates, we will
know that the lifts cannot last till the
recommended 28 years. Our town council
for example had to bring forward the
replacement of over 100 lifts in
McFersonen because it has come to a
point whereby the lifts just kept
breaking down no matter how much we
maintain the lifts. Our rail line
signaling substations and power
distribution networks could face the
same challenge. Hence deeper
interventions and bigger budgets are to
be expected. Secondly, as our
demographics shift, demand patterns and
standards will evolve. For example, an
aging population means greater use of
lives, means more shelter walkways with
more benches needed for resting along
the way with a move to using more
electronic vehicles and eventually
autonomous vehicles as well. More
charging stations and other
infrastructure will be needed and so
space and power allocation have to
change. Overall, planning norms, quality
standards and budgets will have to
change. Thirdly, climate changes will
add to the challenges we face. Higher
temperatures, more intense storms, and
rising sea levels can accelerate
material degradation, strain our
drainage and power system, and increase
the need for backup and emergency
response capabilities. Taken together,
Singapore must take a strategic approach
that treats infrastructure as longive
systems requiring continuous investment,
greater use of digital solutions for
better oversight, and periodic deep
renewal. This means having to consider
new norms, higher standards, more
predictive approaches and unfortunately
higher public standing. Tough job for
MOF. Though refreshing or building new
infrastructure is not exactly defying
the odds, it is important because the
right built environment can free us from
everyday friction, sharpen our focus,
spark creativity, and unlock our best
performance in Chinese.
UFO.
forchech.
for
Fore!
Foreign! Foreign!
Fore
speech.
woman.
Fore! Foreign! Foreign!
sir, this year we celebrate SG60. As a
Singaporean, I'm glad that we have not
let our forefathers down and Singapore
remains a shining red dot on the world
stage. Yet, as the pres as President
Dhman reminded us, Singapore now stands
again at a piv p pivotal moment. A
nation tested by history, by the
turbulence of a shifting world, and by
profound domestic changes. Singapore has
always risen to respond to challenges
time and again, through our openness and
resilience, through our long-term
planning and willingness to take
actions, through our resolve, grit, and
unity. And it shall be no different now
as we mark SG60. At this point, I would
also like to take the opportunity to
thank the residents of McFersonen and
the broader Marine Parade Brattle
Heights GRC. Thank you for your trust in
us, in me so that we can continue this
journey together so that we can be your
voice in this house. We have grown
together for so many years in the past.
We have overcome many different and
difficult moments including the COVID 19
pandemic. We have together come up with
new ideas to see to to strengthen our
community to better our services to
deliver community good for the broader
community. We have raised funds,
crowdsourced for ideas and I believe
that we'll continue to grow stronger
together. And so in conclusion, we have
defied the odds then we will defy the
odds again and again. I support the
motion.
>> Mr. Le poly
Mr. Speaker in response to Mr. Shar's
clarification in the article it says
that the fundraising that it was a SG60
community fundraising initiative
together with MCQ at towns
um
Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to thank Mr.
Fley for citing the good work that our
MCQ and MCQ volunteers do. It's truly a
good example of a weer society. In just
over a month during the month of
Ramadan, the MQ volunteers raised 2.4
million through stallholders,
individuals, businesses, uh, and also
through temples. It's a good example of
a weifer society where we can work
together towards a common good. Thank
you.
Mrs. Zukanan Abdul Rahim.
Mr. Speaker, I support the motion to
thank the president for his address.
President Tamman Shan Mugratnam reminded
us that the world is changing in
profound ways that our global order is
fraying that we must face the future
with foresight with fortitude and with
faith in one another. Allow me to frame
my remarks under three themes. First,
unity at home. Second, competitiveness
through innovation. And third,
conviction in the rule of law. Mr.
Speaker, families form the foundation of
our nation. They are the fortress where
values are first planted and resilience
nurtured. The president was right to
emphasize that we must continue to
support parents, children, and seniors,
whether through child care, housing,
elder care, or help for blended and
multigeneration families. Five years
ago, in my maiden parliamentary speech
in this house, I spoke about my son's
love of playing with Lego blocks and how
each Lego brick is like our family unit,
the building blocks of our society, with
each one unique in shape and in form and
how we can enhance support and
connection with one another. Now, I have
taught my son to pick up chess. What
began as a game quickly became a way for
me to share life lessons. I taught him
three lessons. First, the goal is to
capture the king. You can risk
everything but not your queen. Second,
if you play to avoid losing a single
piece, then you will surely play to
lose. Third, whether you are king or
pawn, everyone everyone returns to the
same wooden box. In the end, these, Mr.
Speaker, are not just lessons in chess,
but also lessons in love and in life.
We protect what is most precious to us.
We take bold steps when needed. And in
the end, we must remember that what
matters is not status, but how we played
the game, the game of life. Beyond
families and into our communities,
racial and religious harmony,
meritocracy also form the vital glue
that holds a nation together through
times of change. In our pursuit of
growth and progress, these must never be
sacrificed or compromised. For they are
not negotiable assets, but enduring
safeguards of our collective well-being.
Lesson number one. Just as in chess
where the goal must be to capture the
king, but one must never recklessly risk
the queen, we must strive for success
and advancement. Yet, we must never
endanger the sanctity of family life and
our racial and religious harmony.
Without them, even the boldest pursuit
of victory would come at too great a
cost. That's why I'm proposing more
support for families by extending
schemes such as the large family scheme,
life SD credits to support more families
included, including blended blended
families with stepchildren. In this
house, I've also previously called for
more childcare leave and support to be
given to families with more children.
Beyond this, let us strengthen parental
support, expand intergenerational
programs, enhance after school care, and
provide more relief for caregivers. Just
as in chess, every piece matters. In
Singapore, every family, no matter its
form, deserves our support. Our nation's
story is one of sacrifice and
solidarity. We must continue to choose
we first, not me first. Mr. Speaker, the
president reminded us that global
competition is intensifying. Cost alone
will not carry us forward. We must adapt
faster, innovate bolder, compete on
skill, on speed, and on trust. Here too,
the lessons of chess offers some wisdom.
Lesson number two. If you play only to
avoid losing a single piece, then you
will surely play to lose. The player who
hesitates, clinging to pieces, fearing
change will soon find himself cornered.
The master anticipates, innovates, and
deploys its piece to the best advantage.
Likewise, if Singapore clings to old
ways, paralyzed by fear of change, we
will be overtaken. To win, we must
anticipate, take calculated risks, and
deploy every piece to its best
advantage.
For Singapore, this means skilling up
our people, scaling up our enterprises,
and sharpening our public service.
Skills future level up and mid-career
reskilling schemes are like pawns,
steadily advancing each move, creating
new possibilities. Enterprises that
harness artificial intelligence, green
technologies, and advanced manufacturing
are like bishops and rooks, powerful
when used with foresight. But innovation
must not stop with businesses or
workers. Government too must lead by
example. In my recent PQs, I asked
whether AI tools and technology are
being explored in government's
procurement processes to reduce errors
and strengthen oversight and to also
introduce more dynamic social economic
assistance packages that can be more
responsive to real cost of living
pressures.
Mr. Speaker, Singapore has always been a
city that defies its size, a small but
smart nation. If we remain re restless
in innovation, relentless in
improvement, and responsible in
governance, then like a skillful chess
player, we will not merely react to the
board, but we can be five moves ahead.
We will shape the game and remain
resilient in a shifting world.
Mr. Speaker, the president warned us
also that might his right is once again
rearing its ugly head. Tariff wars and
protectionism are weakening global trade
rules. In conflict zones and
humanitarian crisis places like Gaza,
civilians suffer most when international
humanitarian law is disregarded.
Here too, I return to that simple lesson
I shared with my son. Lesson number
three. At the end of the game, whether
you are king or pawn, everyone goes back
into the same wooden box. It is a
reminder of humility, of equality, and
of the limits of power. In chess, even
the strongest piece must obey the rules.
Without them, the game collapses into
chaos. Likewise, in international
relations, rules and law are what
protect the small from the strong, the
weak from the powerful. For Singapore,
this means upholding fairness and the
rule of law at home, ensuring justice is
impartial, combating foreign
interference, protecting our people from
crime and terrorism. Internationally, it
means standing up for the rules-based
order, defending open trade against
protectionism, affirming humanitarian
principles that shield civilians from
suffering.
Singapore may be small, but when we
stand by principle, we are larger than
our size. In choosing rules over power,
we safeguard not only ourselves, but the
very system that allows small states
like us to stand tall. Mr. Speaker, in
Malay, please
Geopolitan.
economy.
Just
Singapore.
Bring inch.
Professor,
Professor
System
Project
class mathemat
support.
We first
meritocracy.
Lawrence Wong. Mr. speaker. Sir, the
word gong royong since it's the lay
language man,
the word gong gong is derived from the
Japanese verbong which signifies the act
of carrying a burden. Royong implies
doing it together.
Merritocracy is our shared commitment to
help one another with compassion. Our
goong royong. This is how we
Singaporeans carry each other together.
Unity at home, competitive
competitiveness through innovation,
conviction in the rule of law. These are
the three coordinates of our cause as a
nation. Just like the chess lessons I
gave to my son who's going to sit for
his PSLE soon, we safeguard what is
dearest. We act with courage when the
moment calls for it. And in the end, it
is not rank that defines us, but the
integrity with which we played the game.
Hence, if we keep our families firm and
our society inclusive, if we keep our
people skilled, our enterprises bold,
and our government innovative with
integrity, if we keep our politics
principled, and our laws respected, our
people united, then like a well-played
game of chess, Singapore will not just
survive in this turbulent tournament of
nations, but secure a stronger, fairer,
and more united future for generations
to come. Majula Singapura. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Impaling, you have a clarification.
Mr. Speaker, thank you. I forgot to
declare my interest. I'm working in a
major payment institution and therefore
just now earlier in my speech, I
mentioned the event, the closed door
event organized by my firm. I would like
to declare my interest here. Thank you.
Mr. Shar Taha.
>> Mr. Speaker, may I seek your consent to
move that the debate be now ajourned.
>> I give my consent.
>> Mr. Speaker, I move that the debate be
now ajourned.
>> Question is that the debate be now
adjourned. Those who agree say I. I.
Those who disagree say no.
I think the eyes have it. The eyes have
it.
Mr. Shahut Taha. Debate to be resumed on
what day?
>> Tomorrow. Mr. Speaker, sir.
>> So be it. Leader.
>> Mr. Speaker, I move that Parliament do
now adjourn.
The question is that parliament do now
adjourn. Associate Professor Jameus Lim.
Sir, back in July this year, I uploaded
a social media post that congratulated
SMD Lee for receiving an honorary
fellowship from the Economic Society of
Singapore. The honor was the highest
that the society of which I'm a council
member can grant. In my post, I observed
how I differed philosophically from SM.
These have to do with different beliefs
about the philosophy of public policy,
especially as it concerns market
efficiency and fair distribution. I use
the example he raised in his dialogue
about the certificate of entitlement or
COE system and explain how by relegating
allocation decisions to an impersonal
market he implicitly accepted that such
resulting allocations were fair or as
fair as they could potentially be. I
know that that there were could be a
difference between COE allocations based
on market prices versus individual
needs.
So it's valuable at the outset to stress
that I do not differ from the
government's position on prioritizing
public transport. Singapore is a dense
urban city and like all such cities,
public transportation is rightly the
cornerstone of intracity commuting.
Ministry of transport orot efforts
should rightly be focused on expanding
efficient, affordable and accessible
public transport. This includes
addressing our over congestion issues
along certain MRT and LRT lines,
including in Sang, the constituency that
I represent and as discussed earlier
today, and improving cross island
connectivity to to reduce commute times,
not downplaying the importance of the
bus system as a lastm solution given our
hot and humid climate and aging
population and a road system that is
more inclusive of greener travel
options.
I first spoke about Singapore's vehicle
quarter system or VQS and the associated
COE's and the workers party motion filed
in 2023 on the cost of living crisis. My
speech at the time was focused on
refining the system as I understood it
and among the most important suggestions
I offered was a supply side change to
smooth the annual quarter supply across
a 10-year cycle so that what is on offer
every month would roughly be the same.
and a demand site one to shift private
higher car or PHC bids to the open
category E. This would in my view
contribute to containing COE price
increases as well as its fluctuation.
Such moves are even more salient today
as this month's CAT A and B premier
cleared eyewatering amounts of 119,000
and 136,000 respectively.
Since that time, the ministry has rolled
out the cut and fill system, which seeks
to balance out year-to-year variations
in COE supply.
While it has been implemented with less
vigor than I would personally have
preferred, in the debate at the time,
then Minister Chi explained that the
government's position was based on the
desire to minimize dismenities that
would result from introducing too many
cars on the road in the short term. I am
nevertheless gratified that at least
some steps have been taken to manage the
feast and famine nature of year-to-year
COE pricing. I urge the government to
continue to be more aggressive in its
cutting from future supply and not be
satisfied with mainly moving guaranteed
dregistrations.
I'm also hopeful that the government
will eventually come round to moving
PHC's into the quota for CAT E as it
already does with taxis so that their
commercially minded bids do not
inadvertently distort demand for
non-commercial use. Now, in my speech, I
also underscored how the VQS system
resulted in our ability to enjoy
uncongested streets, especially comp
compared with other global cities such
as London or New York, which has perhaps
revealingly since gone ahead with a road
pricing system of their own. It would
not be a mischaracterization to state
that I believe that the benefits of the
system outweigh the costs and I do not
favor its complete repeal.
Still, in this speech, in my speech,
then I also alluded to how while the
government contends that private car
ownership is a luxury rather than a
need, there are certain groups for whom
access to a car is somewhat closer to a
need than a luxury.
Today I will build on that speech I
delivered two years ago. I hope to
propose yet another refinement. This
time not to improve the systems
efficiency per se but is equity. To set
the stage, I will first share my view on
why certain groups are in greater need
for private transport. I will then
discuss how the COE system can be
further refined to account for not just
the ability to pay but also assess
according to needs.
So I believe three groups benefit
disproportionately from private car
ownership. Parents of multiple young
children, caregivers to elderly parents,
especially if one or both suffer from a
chronic illness, and those who are
disabled.
Any parent of a young child of whom I'm
one will grasp how game-changing it is
to be able to directly f their kids from
say one supplementary or tuition class
to another, especially if their
interests and talents differ. And
instructors in schools are located all
over the island. Those who have
potentially given up their own careers
to take care of a parent battling
perhaps cancer will appreciate the
flexibility that private transport
affords as they bring their father or
mother to their chemotherapy sessions.
And it is a given that those who lack
physical mobility due to a disability
would benefit enormously from the
independence afforded by a car.
Importantly,
such such groups are not unfamiliar to
us. We have agencies, the agency for
integrated care and SG enable to
coordinate elderly and disabled care and
an entire ministry, the ministry of
social and family development whose debt
is to support families. We already have
clear definitions for what constitutes a
primary caregiver to seniors, who is a
parent or guardian of a child as
stipulated in the young person's act,
and an MSF accepted basis for those who
are considered disabled in our social
policies.
What else is common among these groups,
however, is that the their need for
private transportation is more acute
than that of the average citizen. They
would accordingly benefit from financial
support that would make a car more
accessible to them. Notably, in one
specific case, the disabled, we, and I
cannot emphasize this enough, already
have in place a program, the disabled
person scheme that grants a full waiver
of the COE if a disabled person is
seeking a vehicle to commute to work.
Now, one may argue that this
discrimination, if you will, is by
design
or rather lack of discrimination, excuse
me. Rather than provide targeted support
toward car ownership, the government
currently provides generalized financial
assistance which can be easily applied
toward offsetting the cost of a COE.
Money is funible and such generality
allows each beneficiary household to
decide for themselves whether the cash
is better spent on transport or any
other need. But yet this government has
not historically shied away from
choosing targeted support so long as it
felt that there could be potential
spillover benefits from directing
individual or corporate conduct. That's
why our CDC vouchers are targeted
because we wish to not only encourage
household consumption via such
transfers, but to also direct spending
towards supporting our heartland
businesses. That's why we grant
businesses tax write offs for qualifying
R&D expenditures so that they devote
more resources toward growth enhancing
innovation. That's why directs its
financial assistance scheme for
lowincome households toward educational
expenses such as fees and books to help
educate the next generation and
hopefully break free from that cycle of
poverty.
By the same token, targeted support for
car ownership can provide or excuse me,
can promote positive behaviors such as
children engaging in caregiving for
their elderly father or mother or
timestrap parents deciding to have their
second or third child or those with
disabilities feeling sufficiently
empowered to enter the workforce.
But it is more than that. Such targeted
mechanisms can serve as a signal of the
values we place as a society on cultural
norms such as felop piety, family
bonding and care for the weak and
downtrodden.
One may say it is hard to adjudicate
between different groups with needs and
so it is better not to do so at all by
leaving it to the market. Or you may say
like me that we should not let the
perfect be the enemy of the good and
seek a way to help certain groups that
we have already identified as more
needy.
Now this isn't the first time this house
will have debated the merits of enabling
greater access to COE for certain
groups. In the 14th parliament, then
NCMP Hazel Pua mooted the idea of a COE
credits allocation framework where
tradable credits replaced the existing
pricebased system. Certain groups,
families with young children, the
elderly, the disabled, and those who
have served national service would
receive slightly higher allocations in
recognition of their greater needs or
greater contributions. To blunt the
fiscal impact, she suggested a base fee,
which is either determined by car engine
capacity or as a share of the vehicle's
open market value. The proposal's intent
is similar to what I am suggesting today
to better level the playing field
between the genuine needs of certain
households for a private vehicle versus
their ability to pay for a COE. It
bridges the gap between need and
affordability. In that regard, the
spirit of the idea is sound. However,
Miss Paw's proposal relies on a non-pric
system for the initial allocation before
sub subsequently subjecting these
credits to market exchange, which
introduces additional wrinkles of
complexity and opacity to an otherwise
straightforward auctionbased pricing
system. The government's response to
that proposal raised similar concerns
about how it is complicated and runs the
risk of inefficient pricing. But then
SMS for transport Amy core also trotted
out an old trope that having the
government dictate differential credit
allocations would be excessively
subjective. SM Lee in his address had
made a similar point that the market was
the most fair and efficient way
Now while I agree that the victory
auction on which the COE is based is
indeed an efficient mechanism, let us
not pretend that is actually fair or
neutral. Allowing prices to be dictated
by the market simply abstracts from the
need by allowing money to adjudicate
between competing demands. Those with
more money will automatically be able to
bid more to secure the limited resource.
It is only fair if we believe that the
distribution of income and wealth in
society is also always fair.
Now what might be a simple way forward?
I'll propose what I believe is a cleaner
approach toward incorporating the needs
of certain groups which if I may remind
this house we have already accepted are
worth supporting within the existing
pricebased COE system. This idea is
discounts. To be concrete, we may
consider a variant of the following. For
the disabled, we offer a 100% discount
on the COE. This is a full waiver which
is already in place in the form of the
disabled person scheme. For parents of
two or more children, of which at least
two must be below 14 years, a 10%
discount for each additional child
beyond the first. Hence, a family of two
children aged four and seven would
receive a 10% discount, while one with
three children aged between 2 and 13
would receive a 20% discount. A family
with a five and 15 year old would not
receive any discount, nor would single
child families.
For primary caregivers of either two
parents above 80 years of age or one
parent who suffers from a chronic
illness that is in need of regular
medical checkups, all of whom must live
within the same household, a 10%
discount. The discount will apply at the
time of purchase. CO prices would still
follow market values thereafter. Hence,
should the vehicle subsequently be sold,
the benefits would remain with the
family that qualified for the discount
in the first place. What some has
speculated based on the experience of
the EV subsid subsidy that rebates might
simply pass on into higher COE prices.
This has not been definitively proven.
Perhaps more important, the much smaller
segment of potential buyers which would
qualify for such discounts makes it
highly unlikely that they will
materially move markets. To ensure that
this system caters to genuine needs
while keeping the system fiscally sound,
we can accompany these with some form of
means testing. For example, we may apply
the discount to families that earn below
the medium income thresh threshold or
instead we may exclude the top quintile
of earners from the scheme.
Sir, although I focus on the COE, I
recognize that this is ultimately an
imperfect proxy for road usage which is
the scarce resource that is actually
being rationed. The government is moving
toward a system where the cost of car
ownership will be deemphasized while
that of road usage will come to the
four. This is distancebased charging
which has already been sh foreshadowed
by the rollout of ERP 2.0.
Should COE prices fall alongside
distance-based charges, it will
certainly address some concerns by some
of the groups that I mentioned. But role
pricing will bring its own set of
fairness considerations. After all,
those living further away, such as
estates in Pongo or Sing, will suddenly
be subject to a higher distance charge
just to get to work due to the
unanticipated change in policy.
Now, this is a debate for another day,
but I hope that the thoughts I offer
today already hint at the importance of
not just taking efficiency into
consideration while evaluating who has
the right to use our roads, but the
equity considerations will come to the
four as well.
Acting Minister for Transport, Jeff S.
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the member
for his motion and the opportunity to
speak today for the third time.
COE policies have been debated
extensively before in this very chamber.
Many ideas have been proposed and
debated over the years. I want to take
this opportunity to reiterate why we
have this system and also to address
some of the questions that other members
have raised during this week's sittings
on the COE.
The COE system is neither perfect nor
popular. But I'm glad that Associate
Professor Lim agrees that there is still
a need for a COE system. We do not have
enough land for every person or even
every household to own a car. If every
household owns a car, we will have
around 1.5 million private cars on our
roads, which is more than two times the
current car population.
We will need far more roads, but today
12% of our land is already occupied by
road. And so any additional land take by
roads will come at the expense of other
meritorious needs, housing, schools,
hospitals, community facilities, things
that are good for our people.
That is why our approach is to focus on
mass public transport and not car
ownership. And I'm very glad that
associate professor Lim agrees with me
on this. We let people make their own
decisions on whether they want to spend
their money on buying a car and
therefore bid for a COE. The COE
revenues which are about 4 to6 billion a
year on average go towards subsidizing
public transport as well as other
government expenditures for the good of
society, health care, education,
defense. With COE revenues, we can
provide every Singaporean with high
quality and affordable public transport.
This way, we achieve the greatest good
for the greatest number.
This is the fairest approach because
some people don't want to drive, some
people are unable to drive, and some
people don't want to be burdened by a
car loan. But everyone can use good
public transport to get to where they
want to go. Associate Professor Lim
argues for a COE system based on needs
and concepts of fairness. Other
Singaporeans have shared similar
perspectives with me, suggesting groups
that can be treated specially or be
subsidized for car ownership.
I sympathize with many of these
perspectives, in particular, families
with young children or those sending
elderly parents to medical appointments.
It is not easy, I know, navigating
public transport with several young kids
in toll or with a senior in a
wheelchair. I understand that. Even
though it is much better now than say 10
years ago when the public transport
system was not totally barrierfree, it
is now. I do not doubt that these
families will benefit from a car.
As an alternative, some of them use
private hire cars or rent a car once in
a while when they need it. These options
are not perfect substitutes, but they
come close and are more affordable than
buying a car.
I have received many appeals for COE
subsidies for such families or as uh the
member proposes discounts. But whenever
we consider this, it is difficult to
make the case because rather than give
one family a substantial COE subsidy,
whether says 10K, 20K, 30K, the same
amount of subsidy can be redistributed
to benefit many more families, including
those who do not want or who are not
able to afford a car.
For example, we can give many more
families credits to be used for
transport services as you have done with
the large family scheme or to defay
other expenditures through cash or with
vouchers.
It is challenging for the government to
allocate sees based on needs. What
appears deserving to one person might
not appear fair to another. For example,
if we subsidize families with children,
how many children? How old should the
children be? Or if we allocate based on
income, we have to decide whether to do
household income or personal income or
whether big households should be more
deserving than small families. And then
there are the practical considerations.
Do we take away the car when the need is
gone?
or all these ideas sound very attractive
but no matter how one draws the line
there will always be people who fall on
the wrong side of the line who believe
that they are more deserving and we will
still be here at another parliament
sitting debating at this late hour how
each line has been drawn
I understand the concerns over the
rising COE prices in recent months more
potential car buyers feel priced out the
government has tried to stabilize the
supply. We brought forward some COE
quota from the future to flatten the
peaks and the trials of the supply curve
and we are making a one-off inje
injection of up to 20,000 COE's which we
announced in October 2024.
In fact, the quarterly COE supply has
doubled since 2023.
But COE prices have continued to rise
because of demand. Electric vehicles,
especially those from China, are being
brought into Singapore cheaply, and this
means more money being put into COE
bids.
Some people have suggested that PHC
companies, private higher car companies,
are responsible for driving up COE
prices.
Less than 10% of bids have been worn by
car leasing companies this year. Even if
we remove all of the PHC bids, the price
of the marginal biders below the
clearing price would not be much lower.
Should we have a separate COE category
for PSC's or to move them to category E
as the member suggests? Well, a se
separate category would mean where we
have to take quota away from cat A and
cat and cat E. How much would be enough?
Would it be more than 10% or less than
10%. If more than 10% there will be
fewer COE's for cat A and cat B today.
If less than 10% there will be fewer
private hire cars to meet customer
demand. And then what would happen is
that there would be higher PHC fairs and
higher rentals for drivers. and this
will disadvantage Singaporeans who
cannot afford a car and who can only
rely on private hire cars to get around.
Ultimately, we all want to do better for
Singapore and Singaporeans. I share the
same broader goal as associate professor
Lim of expanding connectivity for all
Singaporeans. Where we defer is in how
to achieve that. For this government, we
make sure that we deliver the greatest
good for the greatest number. We do so
by investing heavily in our public
transport system. The government spends
some $2 billion on operation subsidies
to keep our bus and train services
running every year. We build new train
lines that serve millions of journeys
every day. We build covered walkways,
upgrade our foot paths, expand our
cycling paths to make first and last
mile journeys of public transport
commuters more convenient and
comfortable.
The COE system should therefore be seen
in this broader context. A needsbased
system for the COE sounds attractive,
but in practice it is subjective,
divisive and benefits too few.
The market mechanism is transparent and
allows the government to channel COE
revenues to the benefit of the wider
public. This is not a perfect system,
but is the fairest and most effective
way to allocate a scarce resource in
Singapore's context. Thank you, Mr.
Speaker.
The question is that Parliament do now
adjourn. Those who agree say I.
>> I.
>> Those who disagree say no.
I think the I have it. The I have it.
Pursuant to standing order 2 section 3A,
I wish to inform honorable members that
the sitting tomorrow will commence at
11:30
a.m. Order. Order.